In the name of God, the Gracious, the Compassionate.
Praise is to God, Lord of the worlds.
The Gracious, the Compassionate.
Master of the day of judgment.*
You alone we serve; you alone we ask for help.
Guide us to the straight way;
the way of those whom you blessed; not of those who received anger, nor of the strayers.*
A1L30M40*
This is the book in which there is no doubt, a guide for the conscientious.
Those who acknowledge the unseen, and observe the contact prayer (sala), and from Our provisions to them, they spend.*
Those who acknowledge what was sent down to you, and what was sent down before you, and regarding the Hereafter they are certain.*
These are the ones guided by their Lord, and these are the winners.
As for those who do not appreciate, whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not acknowledge.*
God has sealed their hearts and their ears; and over their eyes are covers. They will incur a great retribution.
Among the people are those who say, "We acknowledge God and the Last day," but they do not acknowledge.
They seek to deceive God and those who acknowledge, but they only deceive themselves without noticing.
In their hearts is a disease, so God increases their disease, and they will have a painful retribution for what they have denied.
If they are told "Do not make evil in the land," they say, "But we are the reformers!"
No, they are the evildoers, but they do not perceive.
If they are told, "acknowledge as the people have acknowledged," they say, "Shall we acknowledge as the fools have acknowledged?" No, they are the fools but they do not know.
If they come across those who have acknowledged, they say, "We acknowledge," and when they are alone with their devils they say, "We are with you, we were only mocking."
God mocks them, and leaves them prolonged in their transgression.
These are those who have purchased straying for guidance; their trade did not profit them, nor were they guided.
Their example is like one who lights a fire, so when it illuminates what is around him, God takes away his light and leaves him in the darkness not seeing.
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not revert.
Or like a storm from the sky, in it are darkness, thunder, and lightning. They place their fingers in their ears from stunning noises out of fear of death; and God is aware of the ingrates.
The lightning nearly snatches away their sight, whenever it lights the path, they walk in it, and when it becomes dark for them, they stand. Had God willed, He would have taken away their hearing and their sight. God is capable of all things.
O people, serve your Lord who has created you and those before you that you may be conscientious.
The One who made the land a habitat, and the sky a structure, and He sent down from the sky water with which He brought out fruit as a provision for you. So do not make any equals with God while you now know.
If you are in doubt as to what We have sent down to Our servant, then bring a chapter like this, and call upon your witnesses other than God if you are truthful.*
If you cannot do this -- and you will not be able to do this -- then beware of the fire whose fuel is people and stones; it has been prepared for the ingrates.
Give good news to those who acknowledge and do the reforms, that they will have gardens with rivers flowing beneath. Every time they receive of its fruit, they say, "This is what we have been provisioned before," and they are given its likeness/allegories. Moreover, there they will have pure spouses, and there they will abide.*
God does not shy away from citing the example of a mosquito, or anything above it. As for those who acknowledge, they know that it is the truth from their Lord. As for the unappreciative, they say, "What does God want with this example?" He lets many stray by it, and He guides many, but He only lets stray the evildoers.
The ones who break their pledge to God after making the covenant, and they sever what God had ordered to be joined. Moreover, they make corruption on earth; these are the losers.
How can you not appreciate God when you were dead and He brought you to life? Then He makes you die, then He brings you to life, then to Him you return.*
He is the One who created for you all that is in the earth. Moroever, He attended to the universe and made it seven heavens, and He is aware of all things.
Your Lord said to the angels, "I am placing a successor on earth." They said, "Would You place in it he who would corrupt it, and shed blood, while we sing Your glory, and praise You?" He said, "I know what you do not know."
He taught Adam the description of all things, and then He displayed them to the angels and said, "Inform Me the descriptions of these things if you are truthful."*
They said, "Glory be to You, we have no knowledge except what You have taught us, You are the Knowledgeable, the Wise."
He said, "O Adam, inform them of the descriptions of these." When he informed them of their descriptions, He said, "Did I not tell you that I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you reveal and what you were hiding?"
We said to the angels, "Submit to Adam," so they submitted except for Iblis, he refused and became arrogant, and became of the ingrates.
We said, "O Adam, reside you and your mate in the paradise, and eat from it bountifully as you both wish, and do not approach this tree, else you will be of those who did wrong."*
So, the devil tricked both and he brought both of them out from what they were in, and We said, "Descend, you are all enemies of one another. In the land shall be stability for you and luxury for a while."*
Adam then received words from His Lord, so He forgave him; He is the Forgiver, the Compassionate.
We said, "Descend from it all of you, so when the guidance comes from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, they will have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve."
Those who do not appreciate and deny Our signs, they are the dwellers of fire, in it they will abide.
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I had blessed you with, and fulfill your pledge to Me that I may fulfill My pledge to you, and revere Me alone.
Acknowledge what I have sent down, authenticating what is already with you, and do not be the first to reject it! Moreover, do not purchase with My signs a cheap gain; and of Me you shall be conscientious.*
Do not obscure the truth with falsehood, nor keep the truth secret while you know.
Observe the Contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, and kneel with those who kneel.*
Do you order the people to do goodness, but forget yourselves, while you are reciting the book? Do you not reason?
Seek help through patience, and the Contact prayer. It is a difficult thing, but not so for the humble.
The ones who conceive that they will meet their Lord and that to Him they will return.
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I had blessed you with, and that I had preferred you to all the worlds!
Beware of a day where no person can avail another person, nor will any intercession be accepted from it, nor will any ransom be taken, nor will they have supporters.*
We saved you from the people of Pharaoh; they were punishing you with severe retribution, killing your children, and shaming your women. In that was a great trial from your Lord.
We parted the sea for you, thus We saved you and drowned the people of Pharaoh while you were watching.
We appointed a meeting time for Moses of forty nights, but then you took the calf after him while you were wicked.*
Then We forgave you after so that perhaps you would be thankful.
We gave Moses the book and the criterion so that perhaps you would be guided.
Moses said to his people, "O my people, you have wronged yourselves by taking the calf, so repent to your Maker, and face yourselves. That is better for you with your Maker, so He would forgive you. He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate."*
When you said, "O Moses, we will not acknowledge you until we see God openly!" the lightning bolt took you while you were still staring.*
Then We resurrected you after your death that you may be appreciative.
We shaded you with clouds, and sent down to you manna and quails, "Eat from the goodness of the provisions We have provided you." They did not wrong Us, but it was themselves that they wronged.
We said, "Enter this town, and eat from it as plentifully as you wish; and enter the gate humbly, and talk amicably, We will then forgive your mistakes, and We will increase for the good-doers."
But the wicked altered what was said to them into a different saying, thus We sent down upon the wicked an affliction from the sky because they had transgressed.*
Moses was seeking water for his people, so We said, "Strike the rock with your staff." Thus, twelve springs burst out of it; each tribe then knew from where to drink. "Eat and drink from God's provisions, and do not roam the earth as corruptors."*
You said, "O Moses, we will not be patient to one type of food, so call for us your Lord that He may bring forth what the earth grows of its beans, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions." He said, "Would you trade what is lowly with what is good?" Descend to Egypt, you will have in it what you have asked for. They were thus stricken with humiliation and disgrace, and they remained under God's wrath for they were not appreciating God's signs, and killing the prophets with no justification. This is for what they have disobeyed and transgressed.*
Surely those who acknowledge, and those who are Jewish, and the Nazarenes, and those who follow other religions, any one of them who acknowledge God and the Last day, and do reform, they will have their reward with their Lord, with no fear over them, nor will they grieve.*
We took your covenant, and raised the mount above you, "Take what We have given you with strength, and remember what is in it that you may be conscientious."
Then you turned away after this. Had it not been for God's favor upon you and His mercy, you would have been of the losers.
You have come to know who it was amongst you that transgressed the Sabbath, We said to them, "Be despicable apes!"*
We did this as a punishment for what they had done on it and afterwards, and a reminder to the righteous.
Moses said to his people, "God orders you to slaughter a heifer." They said, "Do you mock us?" He said, "I seek refuge with God lest I be of the ignorant ones."*
They said, "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify which it is." He said, "He says it is a heifer neither too old nor too young, an age between that. So now do as you are commanded."
They said, "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify what color it is." He said, "He says it is a yellow heifer with a bright color, pleasing to those who see it."
They said, "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify which one it is, for the heifers all look alike to us and we will, God willing, be guided."
He said, "He says it is a heifer which was never subjugated to plough the land, or water the crops, free from any blemish." They said, "Now you have come with the truth." They slaughtered it, though they had nearly not done so.
You had murdered a person, and then disputed in the matter; God was to bring out what you were keeping secret.
We said, "Strike him with parts from it." It is thus that God brings the dead to life, and He shows you His signs that you may reason.*
Then your hearts became hardened after that, they became like stones or even harder; but even from the stones there are rivers that burst forth, or from them are those that crack so that the water comes forth, or from them are what fall from the fear of God; God is not unaware of what you do.
Did you expect that they would acknowledge for you, when a group of them had heard God's words then altered them knowingly after what they had reasoned?
When they come across those who acknowledge, they say, "We acknowledge!", and when they are alone with each other they say, "Why do you inform them about what God has said to us? Then, they would use it in an argument against us at your Lord. Do you not reason?"
Do they not know that God knows what they conceal and what they declare?
Amongst them are Gentiles who do not know the book except by hearsay, and they only conjecture.*
So woe to those who write the book with their hands then say, "This is from God," so that they can seek a cheap gain! Woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they have gained.*
They said, "The fire will not touch us except for a few number of days." Say, "Have you taken a pledge with God? If so, then God will not break His pledge. Or do you say about God what you do not know?"
Indeed, whoever gains a bad deed and his mistakes surround him; those are the people of the fire, there they abide eternally.
Those who acknowledge and do the reformation, they are the people of paradise, in it they abide eternally.
We took the covenant of the Children of Israel, "You shall not serve except God, and regard your parents, and regard the relatives, and the orphans, and the needy, and say kind things to the people, and observe the Contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment." Then you turned away, except a few of you; you were objecting.
We have taken a covenant with you, "You shall not spill each other's blood, nor drive each other out from your homes." You agreed to this while bearing witness.
But here you are killing each other and driving out a group of you from their homes; you act towards them with evil and animosity. If they come to you as prisoners, you ransom them while it was forbidden for you to drive them out! Do you acknowledge some of the book and reject some? The punishment for those amongst you who do so is humiliation in this worldly life; and on the day of Resurrection, they will be returned to the most severe retribution. God is not oblivious of what you all do.
These are the ones who have purchased this lowly/worldly life instead of the Hereafter. The retribution will not be reduced for them, nor will they be supported.
We gave Moses the book, and after him, We sent the messengers. Later We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear proofs, and We supported Him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that every time a messenger comes to you with what your minds do not desire, you become arrogant? A group of them you deny, and a group of them you kill!
They said, "Our hearts are uncircumcised/covered!" No, it is God who has cursed them for their rejection, for very little do they acknowledge.
When a book came to them from God, authenticating what is with them -- yet before that they were asking for victory against those who were unappreciative -- so when what they knew came to them, they did not appreciate it! God's curse is upon the ingrates.
Miserable indeed is with what they traded themselves by not appreciating what God has sent down. They did so because of their resentment that God would send down from His grace to whom He pleases from among His servants; thus, they have incurred wrath upon wrath. The ingrates will have a humiliating retribution.
If it is said to them, "Acknowledge what God has sent down," they say, "We acknowledge only what was sent down to us," and they do not appreciate what came after it, while it is the truth authenticating what is with them. Say, "Why then did you kill God's prophets if you were those who acknowledge?"
Moses had come to you with clear proofs, then you took the calf after him; you were wicked!*
We took your covenant, and raised the mount above you, "Take what We have given you with strength, and listen." They said, "We hear and disobey!" and they had consumed the calf inside their hearts by their rejection. Say, "Miserable indeed is what your acknowledgement instructs you if you are those who acknowledge!"*
Say, "If the abode of the Hereafter has been set exclusively for you to the exception of all other people, then you should wish for death if you are truthful!"
They will never wish for it because of what their hands have done; and God is aware of the wicked.
You will find them the most obsessive people regarding long life; as well as those who have set up partners; each one of them wishes that he could live a thousand years. It will not change for him the retribution even if he lived that long; God is watchful over what you do.
Say, "Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, then know that he has sent it down into your heart by God's permission, authenticating what is already present, and a guide and good news for those who acknowledge."
"Whoever was an enemy to God and His angels, and His messengers, and Gabriel, and Michael, then so God is the enemy of those who do not appreciate."
We have sent down to you clear signs; only the evil ones would not appreciate them.
Whenever they make a pledge, does a group of them break it? Alas, most of them do not acknowledge.
When a messenger came to them from God, authenticating what was with them, a group of those who had already received the book placed God's book behind their backs as if they did not know.
They followed what the devils recited regarding Solomon's kingship. Solomon did not reject, but it was the devils that rejected by teaching people magic and what was sent down on the two angels in Babylon, Haroot and Maroot. They would not teach anyone until they would say, "We are a test, so do not be unappreciative!" Thus, they teach what can separate a person from his mate; but they cannot harm anyone except by God's permission. They learn what harms them and does not benefit them, and they have known that he who purchases such a thing has no place in the Hereafter. Miserable indeed is what they traded themselves with; if only they knew!
Had they acknowledged and been aware, it would have brought them a reward from God which is far better if they knew!
O you who acknowledge, do not say, "Shepherd us," but say, "Pay attention to us," and listen. For the ingrates is a painful retribution.*
Neither do those who have not appreciated among the people of the book, nor from among those who have set up partners, wish that any good comes down to you from your Lord. Nevertheless, God chooses with His mercy whom/whomever He wishes; and from God is the greatest favor.
We do not duplicate a sign, or make it forgotten, unless We bring one which is like it or even greater. Did you not know that God is capable of all things?*
Did you not know that to God belongs the kingship of the heavens and earth, and that you do not have besides God any guardian or supporter?
Or do you want to ask your messenger as Moses was asked before? Whoever replaces acknowledgement with rejection, has indeed strayed from the right path.
Many of the people of the book have wished that they could return you to being unappreciative after your acknowledgement, out of envy from themselves after the truth was made clear to them. You shall forgive them and overlook it until God brings His will. God is capable of all things.
Observe the Contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, and what you bring forth of good for yourselves, you will find it with God. God sees what you do.
They said, "None shall enter paradise except those who are Jewish or Nazarenes;" this is what they wish! say, "Bring forth your proof if you are truthful."*
No, whosoever peacefully surrenders himself to God, while being a good-doer; he will have his reward with his Lord. There will be no fear over them, nor will they grieve.
The Jews said, "The Nazarenes have no basis," and the Nazarenes said, "The Jews have no basis," while they are both reciting the book! Similarly, those who do not know have said the same thing. God will judge between them on the day of Resurrection in what they disputed.
Who are more wicked than those who prohibit God's temples; so that His name not be mentioned in them; and they seek their destruction? It is they who should not be able to enter them except in fear; they will have humiliation in this world and in the Hereafter a painful retribution.
To God belongs the east and the west, so wherever you turn, there is God's presence. God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.
They said, "God has taken a son!" Be He glorified. To Him is all that is in the heavens and in the earth, all are humbled to Him.
Initiator of heavens and earth, when He decrees a command, He merely says to it, "Be," and it is.
Those who do not know said, "If only God would speak to us, or a sign would come to us!" The people before them have said similar things; their hearts are so similar! We have clarified the signs for a people who have conviction.*
We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner. You will not be questioned about the people of hell.
Neither the Jews nor the Nazarenes will be pleased with you until you follow their creed. Say, "The guidance is God's guidance." If you follow their wishes after the knowledge has come to you, then none can help or protect you against God.
Those whom We have given the book and they recite it truthfully the way it deserves to be recited; they acknowledge it. As for those who do not appreciate it, they are the losers.
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I have bestowed upon you, and that I have preferred you to all the worlds.
Beware of a day when no person can avail another person, nor will any amendment be accepted from it, nor will any intercession help it; they will not be supported.
Abraham was tested by commands from His Lord, which he completed. He said, "I will make you a leader for the people." He said, "Also from my progeny?" He said, "My pledge will not encompass the wicked."*
We have made the sanctuary to be a model for the people and a security. Utilize the place of Abraham to reach out. We had entrusted to Abraham and Ishmael, "You shall purify My sanctuary for those who visit, those who are devoted, and for those who kneel and prostrate."
Abraham said, "My Lord, make this town secure, and provide for its inhabitants of the fruits for whoever acknowledges God and the Last day." He said, "As for he who does not appreciate, I will let him enjoy for a while, then I will force him to the retribution of the fire, what a miserable destiny!"
As Abraham raised the foundations for the sanctuary with Ishmael, "Our Lord accept this from us, You are the Hearer, the Knowledgeable."
"Our Lord, and let us peacefully surrender to You and from our progeny a nation peacefully surrendering to You, and show us our rites and forgive us; You are the Most Forgiving, the Compassionate."
"Our Lord, and send amongst them a messenger from among themselves, that he may recite to them Your signs and teach them the book and the wisdom, and purify them. You are the Noble, the Wise."
Who would abandon the creed of Abraham except one who fools himself? We have selected him in this world, and in the Hereafter, he is of the reformers.
When his Lord said to him, "Peacefully surrender," he said, "I peacefully surrender to the Lord of the worlds."
Abraham enjoined his sons and Jacob, "O my sons, God has selected the system for you, so do not die except as ones who have peacefully surrendered."*
Or were you present when death came to Jacob and he told his sons, "Who shall you serve after I am gone?" They said, "Your god, and the god of your fathers Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac; One god and to Him we peacefully surrender."
That was a nation that has passed away. To them is what they have earned, and to you is what you have earned; and you will not be asked regarding what they did.
They said, "Be Jews or Nazarenes so that you may be guided!" Say, "No, rather the creed of Abraham, monotheism; for he was not of those who set up partners."*
Say, "We acknowledge God and what was sent down to us and what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, the Patriarchs, what was given to Moses and Jesus, and what was given to the prophets from their Lord; we do not make a distinction between any of them and to Him we peacefully surrender."*
So, if they acknowledge exactly as you have acknowledged, then they are guided; but if they turn away, then they are in opposition, and God will suffice you against them; He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Such is God's coloring. Who is better than God in coloring? To Him we are in service.
 Say, "Do you debate with us regarding God? He is our Lord and your Lord, and we have our work and you have your work, and to Him we are devoted."
"Or do you say that Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Patriarchs were all Jewish or Nazarene?" Say, "Are you more knowledgeable or is God?" Who is more wicked than one who conceals a testimony with him from God? God is not oblivious of what you do.
That was a nation that passed away; to them is what they earned and to you is what you have earned; you will not be asked about what they did.
The foolish from amongst the people will say, "What has turned them away from the focal point that they were on?" Say, "To God is the east and the west, He guides whomsoever He wishes to a straight path."*
As such, We have made you a balanced/impartial nation so that you may be witnesses over the people, and that the messenger may be witness over you. We did not make the focal point that you came on except so that we know who follows the messenger from those who will turn on their heels. It was a big deal indeed except for those whom God had guided; God was not to waste your acknowledgement. God is Kind and Compassionate over the people.
We see the shifting of your face towards the sky; We will thus set for you a focal point that will be pleasing to you, "You shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple; and wherever you may be, you shall all set yourselves towards it." Those who have been given the book know it is the truth from their Lord. God is not oblivious of what you do.
Even if you come to those who have been given the book with every sign, they will not follow your focal point, nor will you follow their focal point, nor will some of them even follow each other's focal point. If you were to follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then you would be one of the wicked.
Those to whom We have given the book know it as they know their own children, and a group of them hides the truth while they know.
The truth is from your Lord; so do not be one of those who doubt.
To each is a direction that he will take, so you shall race towards good deeds. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together. God is capable of all things.
From wherever you go out, you shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple; it is the truth from your Lord; and God is not oblivious of what you do.*
Wherever you go out, you shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple. Wherever you may be, you shall set yourselves towards it; that the people will have no room for debate with you, except those of them who are wicked. You shall not fear them, but fear Me so that I may complete My blessings upon you and that you may be guided.
As We have sent a messenger to you from amongst yourselves reciting Our signs to you, purifying you, and teaching you the book and the wisdom, and teaching you what you did not know.
So remember Me that I may remember you, and be thankful to Me and do not become unappreciative.*
O you who have acknowledged, seek help through patience and the Contact prayer; God is with the patient ones.
Do not say of those who are killed in the sake of God that they are dead; no, they are alive but you do not perceive.*
We will test you with some fear and hunger, and a shortage in money and lives and fruits. Give good news to those who are patient.*
The ones who, when afflicted with adversity, say, "We are to God and to Him we will return."
To these will be a bonding from their Lord and a mercy; they are the guided ones.
The serenity and chivalry are amongst God's emblems. Therefore, whosoever makes Pilgrimage to the sanctuary, or is merely passing through, commits no error by oscillating between them. Whoever volunteers for goodness; indeed God is Appreciative, Knowledgeable.
Surely those who conceal what We have sent down to them which was clear, and the guidance, after God had made it clear in the book; these will be cursed by God and be cursed by those who curse;
Except those who repent, reform and clarify; for those I will accept their repentance, for I am the One who accepts repentance, the Compassionate.
Surely, those who have not appreciated and then died as ingrates; they will be cursed by God, and the angels, and all the people.
They will abide therein, where the retribution will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved.
Your god is but One god, there is no god but He, the Gracious the Compassionate.
Surely, in the creation of heavens and earth, the succession of night and day, and the ships that sail in the sea for the benefit of people, and what God has sent down of water from the sky therewith He brings the earth back to life after it had died, and He sends forth from it every creature, and the movement of the winds and the clouds that have been designated between the earth and the sky are signs for a people that reason.*
Among the people are some who take other than God as equals to Him, they love them as they love God; but those who acknowledge love God more strongly; and when those who were wicked see the retribution, they will see that all power belongs to God, and that God is severe in retribution.*
When those who were followed will disown those who followed them, they will see the retribution; all means have abandoned them.
Those who followed them said, "If we only could have a chance to disown them as they have disowned us." It is such that God will show them their works, which will be regretted by them; they will not leave the fire.
O people, eat of what is in the earth as good and lawful, and do not follow the steps of the devil; he is to you a clear enemy.
He only orders you evil and sin, and that you may say about God what you do not know.
If they are told, "Follow what God has sent down," they say, "No, we will follow what we found our fathers doing!" What if their fathers did not reason much and were not guided?
The example of those who are unappreciative is like the one who repeats what he has heard of calls and shouts; deaf, dumb, and blind; they do not reason.
O you who acknowledge, eat of the good things We have provided for you, and be thankful to God if it is Him you serve.*
He has only forbidden for you what is already dead, the blood, the meat of pig, and what was dedicated to other than God. Whoever finds himself forced out of need and without disobedience or animosity, there is no sin upon him. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Surely, those who conceal what God has sent down of the book, and purchase with it a cheap price; they will not eat into their stomachs except the fire, and God will not speak to them on the day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, and they will have a painful retribution.*
These are the ones who have purchased straying for guidance, and retribution for forgiveness. What made them patient towards the fire!
This is because God has sent down the book with truth; and those who have disputed in the book are in far opposition.
Piety is not to turn your faces towards the east and the west, but piety is one who acknowledges God and the Last day, and the angels, and the book, and the prophets, and he gives money out of love to the near relatives, and the orphans, and the needy and the wayfarer, and those who ask, and to free the slaves, and he observes the Contact prayer, and contributes towards betterment; and those who keep their pledges when they make a pledge, and those who are patient in the face of good and bad and during persecution. These are the ones who have been truthful, and they are the righteous.
O you who acknowledge, equivalent execution has been decreed for you in the cases of killings: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female. Whoever is forgiven anything by his brother, then it is to be followed with good deeds and kindness towards him; that is alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy. Whoever transgresses after that, he will have a painful retribution.*
Through equivalent execution, you will be protecting life, O you who possess intelligence, that you may be righteous.
It is decreed for you that if death should come to any of you, that it is best he leaves a will for his family and relatives according to recognized norms. This is a truth for the righteous.*
Whoever alters it after having heard, the sin will be upon those who alter it. God is Hearer, Omniscient.
If anyone fears deviation or sin from his beneficiary, then he does not commit sin by reconciling what is between them. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, fasting is decreed for you as it was decreed for those before you that perhaps you may be righteous.*
A number of days. Whoever of you is ill or traveling, then the same number from different days; and as for those who can do so but with difficulty, they may redeem by feeding the needy. Whoever does good voluntarily, it is better for him. If you fast, it is better for you if you knew.
The month of Ramadan, in which the Quran was sent down as a guide to the people and a clarification of the guidance and the criterion. Therefore, those of you who witness the month shall fast therein. Whoever is ill or traveling, then the same number from different days. God wants to bring you ease and not to bring you hardship; and so that you may complete the count, and glorify God because He has guided you, that you may be thankful.
If My servants ask you about Me, I am near answering the calls of those who call to Me. So let them respond to Me and acknowledge Me that they may be guided.
It has been made lawful for you during the night of fasting to approach your women sexually. They are a garment for you and you are a garment for them. God knows that you used to betray yourselves so He has accepted your repentance, and forgiven you; now you may approach them and seek what God has written for you. You may eat and drink until the white thread is distinct from the black thread of dawn; then you shall complete the fast until night; and do not approach them while you are devoted in the temples. These are God's boundaries, so do not transgress them. It is thus that God makes His signs clear to the people that they may be righteous.*
Do not consume your money between you unjustly by bribing the decision-makers so that you may consume a part of the other people's money sinfully while you know!*
They ask you regarding the new moons, say, "They are a timing mechanism for the people as well as for the Pilgrimage." Piety is not that you would enter a home from its back, but piety is whoever is aware and comes to the homes through their main doors. Be conscientious of God that you may succeed.*
Fight in the cause of God against those who fight you, but do not transgress, God does not like the aggressors.*
Kill them wherever you find them, and expel them from where they expelled you, and know that persecution is worse than being killed. Do not fight them at the Restricted Temple unless they fight you in it; if they fight you then kill them. Thus is the reward of those who do not appreciate.
If they cease, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Fight them so there is no more persecution, and so that the system is God's. If they cease, then there will be no aggression except against the wicked.*
The Restricted Month is for the Restricted Month. The restrictions are mutual. Whoever attacks you, then you shall attack him the same as he attacked you; and be conscientious of God, and know that God is with the righteous.
Spend in the cause of God, but do not throw your resources to disaster. Do kindness, for God loves those who do kindness.
Complete the Pilgrimage and the visit for God. But, if you are prevented, then make what is affordable of donation, and do not shave your heads until the donation reaches its destination. Whoever of you is ill or has an affliction to his head, then he may redeem by fasting or giving a charity or a sacrifice. But if you are able, then whoever continues the visit until the Pilgrimage, then he shall provide what is affordable of donation. If one cannot find anything, then he must fast for three days during the Pilgrimage and seven when he returns; this will make a complete ten; this is for those whose family is not present at the Restricted Temple. Be conscientious of God, and know that God is severe in retribution.*
The Pilgrimage is in the four known months. So, whosoever decides to perform the Pilgrimage in them, then there shall be no sexual approach, nor vileness, nor quarreling in the Pilgrimage. Any good that you do, God is aware of it; and bring provisions for yourselves, though the best provision is awareness; and be conscientious of Me O you who possesses intelligence.*
There is no blame on you to seek goodness from your Lord. So when you disperse from the places of identification/recognition, then remember God towards the restricted place of perception, and remember Him as He has guided you, for you were before that straying.
Then you shall disperse from where the people dispersed, and seek God's forgiveness; God is surely Forgiving, Compassionate.
When you have completed your rites, then remember God as you remember your fathers or even greater. Among the people are those who say, "Our Lord, give us from this world!", but in the Hereafter he has no part.
Some of them say, "Our Lord, give us good in this world, and good in the Hereafter, and spare us from the retribution of the fire."
These will have a benefit for what they have gained; and God is quick in computing.
Remember God during a number of days. Whoever hurries to two days, there is no sin upon him; and whoever delays, there is no sin upon him if he is being righteous. Be conscientious of God, and know that it is to Him that you will be gathered.
Among the people are those whose words you admire in this worldly life, but God is witness as to what is in his heart, for he is the worst in opposition.
If he gains power, he seeks to corrupt the earth and destroy its crops, and people's lineage. God does not like corruption.
If he is told, "Be conscientious of God," his pride leads to more sin. Hell shall be sufficient for him; what a miserable abode!
Among the people is he who dedicates his person by seeking God's favors; God is Kind to His servants.
O you who acknowledge, join in peace, all of you, and do not follow the footsteps of the devil. He is to you a clear enemy.
But if you slip after the proof has come to you, then know that God is Noble, Wise.
Are they waiting for God to come to them shadowed in clouds with the angels? The matter would then be finished! To God all matters will return.*
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We gave them. Whoever changes God's favor after it has come to him, then God is Mighty in retribution.*
This lowly/worldly life has been made pleasing to the ingrates, and they mock those who acknowledge. Those who are aware will be above them on the day of Resurrection; God provides for whomever He wishes without counting.
The people used to be one nation, then God sent the prophets as bearers of good news and as warners, and He sent down with them the book with the facts so that they may judge between the people in what they were disputing. But after receiving the proof, the people disputed in it due to animosity between them. God guided those who acknowledged with His permission regarding what they disputed in of the truth. God guides whoever/whomever (He) wishes to a straight path.*
Or did you calculate that you would enter paradise, while the example of those who were before you came to you; they were stricken with adversity and hardship, and they were shaken until the messenger and those who acknowledged with him said, "When is God's victory?" Yes indeed, God's victory is near.
They ask you what they should spend, say, "What you spend out of goodness should go to your family and the relatives and the orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarer. Any good you do, God is fully aware of it."
Warfare has been decreed for you while you hate it; and perhaps you may hate something while it is good for you, and perhaps you may love something while it is bad for you; God knows while you do not know.
They ask you about fighting in the restricted month. Say, "Fighting in it is great offense," yet repelling from the path of God and not appreciating Him and the Restricted Temple, driving its inhabitants out is far greater with God. Persecution is worse than being killed." They still will fight you until they turn you back from your system if they are able. Whoever of you turns back from his system, and dies as ingrates, then these have nullified their work in this life and the next; these are the people of the fire; there they will abide eternally!
Those who have acknowledged, and those who have emigrated and strived in the cause of God; these are seeking God's compassion, and God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say, "In them is great harm, and a benefit for people; but their harm is greater than their benefit." They ask you how much are they to give, say, "The excess." Thus, God clarifies for you the signs that you may think.*
In this world and the next. They also ask you regarding the orphans, say, "To reform their situation is best, and if you are to care for them, then they are your brothers." God knows the corrupt from the reformer, and had God wished He could have made things difficult. God is Noble, Wise.
Do not marry the females who set up partners until they acknowledge. An acknowledging servant is better than one who sets up partners even if she attracts you. Do not also marry the males who set up partners until they acknowledge. An acknowledging servant is better than one who sets up partners even if s/he attracts you. These invite to the fire, while God is inviting to paradise and forgiveness by His leave. He clarifies His signs for the people that they may remember.
They ask you about menstruation? Say, "It is painful; so retire yourselves sexually from the women during the menstruation, and do not approach them until they are cleansed. When they are cleansed, then you may approach them as God has commanded you." God loves the repenters and He loves the cleansed.*
Your women are cultivation for you. So approach your cultivation as you wish towards goodness. Be conscientious of God and know that you will meet Him, and give good news to those who acknowledge.*
Do not make God the subject of your oaths; to be pious, aware, and reform relations among people; and God is Hearer, Knower.
God will not call you to account for your casual oaths, but He will call you to account for what has entered your hearts. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
For those who are discontent with their wives, let them wait for four months. If they reconcile, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
If they insist on the divorce, then God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
The divorced women shall wait for three menstruation periods; and it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in their wombs, if they acknowledge God and the Last day. Their husbands are more justified to return to them, if they both wish to reconcile. The women have rights similar to their obligations, according to the recognized norms. But the men will have a degree over them. God is Noble, Wise.
The divorce is allowed twice. So, either remain together equitably, or part ways with kindness. It is not lawful for you to take back anything you have given the women unless you fear that they will not uphold God's limits. So if you fear that they will not uphold God's limits, then there is no sin upon them for what is given back. These are God's limits so do not transgress them. Whoever shall transgress God's limits are the wicked.
So if he divorces her again, then she will not be lawful for him until she has married another husband. If the other husband divorces her, then they are not blamed for coming back together if they think they will uphold God's limits. These are God's limits; He clarifies them for a people that know.
If you have divorced the women, and they have reached their required interim period, then either remain together equitably, or part ways equitably. Do not reconcile with them so you can harm them out of animosity. Whoever does so is doing wickedness to his person. Do not take God's signs lightly; remember God's blessings towards you, and what was sent down to you of the book and the wisdom, He warns you with it. Be conscientious of God and know that God is Knowledgeable in all things.
If you divorce the women, and they have reached their required interim period, then do not prevent them from remarrying their husbands if they amicably agree amongst themselves out of what is best. This is to remind any of you who acknowledge God and the Last day, this is better for you and purer; and God knows while you do not know.
The birth mothers suckle their children two full years, for those who wish to complete the suckling. The man for whom the child is born is responsible for both their provisions and clothing equitably. A person should not be burdened beyond its means. No mother shall be harmed because of her child, nor shall a father be harmed because of his child. For the guardian is the same requirement. So if they wish to separate out of mutual agreement and council, then there is no blame on them. If you want to hire nursing mothers, then there is no blame on you if you return what you have been given according to the recognized norms. Be conscientious of God, and know that God is watching over what you do.
For those of you who pass away and leave widows behind, then their widows will have a required interim period of four months and ten days. When they reach their required interim, then there is no blame on you for what they do to themselves according to the recognized norms. God is Ever-aware of what you do.*
There is no blame upon you if you openly propose marriage to these women, or you keep it between yourselves. God knows that you will be thinking of them, but do not meet them secretly, unless you have something righteous to say. Do not consummate the marriage until the required interim is reached in the book. Know that God knows what is in your minds, so be conscientious of Him, and know that God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
There is no blame on you if you divorce the women before having sexual intercourse with them, or before committing to what was agreed for them. Let them have compensation, the rich according to his means, and the poor according to his means. Compensation, which is according to the recognized norms, is a responsibility for good-doers.*
If you divorce them before having sexual intercourse with them, but you have already agreed to the dowry, then you must give half of what you have agreed, unless they forgive or the guardian over the marriage contract forgives. If you forgive, it is closer to awareness. Do not forget the favor between you; God is Seer over what you do.
Preserve the contact prayers, and the middle contact prayer, and stand devoutly for God.*
But if you are in a state of worry, then you may do so while walking or riding. If you become secure, then remember God as He has taught you what you did not know.*
Those of you who pass away and leave widows behind, leave a will for them that they may enjoy for one year without being evicted. If they leave, then there is no blame on you for what they do to themselves out of the recognized norms; and God is Noble, Wise.*
For the divorced women compensation is an obligation upon the conscientious.
It is such that God clarifies to you His signs that you may reason.
Did you not see those who were evicted from their homes in groups, all the while they were wary of death; so God said to them, "Die," then He resurrected them. God has great favor over the people, but most people are not thankful.
Fight in the cause of God and know that God is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.*
Who will lend God a loan of goodness that He may multiply it for him? God collects and He distributes, and to Him you will return.
Did you not note the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses, they said to their prophet, "Send us a king that we may fight in the cause of God;" he said, "Are you not concerned that if fighting is decreed upon you, you will then not fight?" They said, "Why should we not fight in the cause of God when we have been driven out from our homes with our children." Yet, when fighting was decreed for them, they turned away, except for a few of them! God is fully aware of the wicked.*
Their prophet said to them, "God has sent Saul to you as a king." They said, "How can he have the kingship when we are more deserving than him, and he has not been given an abundance of wealth?" He said, "God has chosen him over you and increased him in knowledge and stature." God grants His sovereignty to whom He chooses; and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.*
Their prophet said to them, "The sign of his kingship shall be that he brings to you the ark in which there is tranquility from your Lord and the legacy of what was left behind by the descendants of Moses and the descendants of Aaron being carried by the angels. In this is a sign for you if you acknowledge."
So when Saul set out with the soldiers, he said, "God will test you with a river, whoever drinks from it is not with me, and whoever does not taste from it except one scoop with his hand is with me." They all drank from it, except a few of them. So when he and those who acknowledged with him crossed it, they said, "We have no power today against Goliath and his soldiers!" But the ones who understood that they would meet God said, "How many a time has a small group beaten a large group by God's leave, and God is with the patient ones!"*
When they came forth to Goliath and his soldiers, they said, "Our Lord grant us patience, and make firm our foothold, and grant us victory over the ingrates."
So they defeated them by God's leave. Thus, David killed Goliath, and God gave him the kingship and the wisdom and taught him what He wished. Had it not been for God pushing the people to challenge one another, then the earth would have long been corrupted. But God has done favor over the worlds.*
These are God's signs, We recite them to you with truth, and you are of the messengers.
Such messengers, We have preferred some to others; some of them talked to God, and He raised some of them in ranks, and We gave Jesus son of Mary the proofs and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. Had God wished, the people after them would not have fought after the proofs had come to them, but they disputed, some of them acknowledged and some of them did not appreciate. Had God wished they would not have fought, but God does whatever He wishes.*
O you who acknowledge, spend from what We have provided for you before a day will come when there is no trade, nor friendship, nor intercession; and the ingrates are the wicked.*
God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Sustainer. No slumber or sleep overtakes Him; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. Who will intercede with Him except by His leave? He knows their present and their future, and they do not have any of His knowledge except for what He wishes. His throne encompasses all of the heavens and the earth and it is easy for Him to preserve them. He is the High, the Great.*
There is no compulsion in the system; the proper way has been made clear from the wrong way. Whoever rejects the transgressors, and acknowledges God, has grasped the firm branch that will never break. God is Hearer, Knower.*
God is the ally of those who acknowledge, He brings them out of the darkness and into the light. As for those who reject, their allies are the transgressors; they bring them out of the light and into the darkness. These are the people of the fire; there they will abide eternally.
Did the news come to you of the person who debated with Abraham regarding his Lord, though God had given him a kingship? Abraham said, "My Lord is the One who gives life and death," he said, "I bring life and death." Abraham said, "God brings the sun from the east, so you bring it from the west!" The one who did not appreciate was confounded! God does not guide the wicked people.*
Or the one who passed through a town, where all its inhabitants had passed away. He said, "How can God possibly resurrect this after its death?" So God put him to death for one hundred calendar years, then He resurrected him. He said, "How long have you stayed here?" He said, "I have stayed here a day or part of a day." He said, "No, you have stayed here for one hundred calendar years! Look at your food and drink, they have not changed, but look at your mule. Thus, We will make you a sign for the people; and look at the bones how We grow them, and then We cover them with flesh." When it was clear to him what happened, he said, "I now know that God is capable of all things!"*
Abraham said, "My Lord, show me how you resurrect the dead." He said, "Do you not already acknowledge?" He said, "I do, but to assure my heart." He said, "Choose four birds, then cut them, then place parts of the birds on each mountain, then call them to you; they will come racing towards you. Know that God is Noble, Wise."*
The example of those who spend their money in the cause of God is like a seed that sprouts forth seven pods, in each pod there is one hundred seeds; and God multiplies for whomever He chooses, and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.
Those who spend their money in the cause of God, then do not follow what they have spent with either insult or harm; they will have their reward with their Lord, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve.
Kind words and forgiveness are far better than charity that is followed by harm. God is Rich, Compassionate.*
O you who acknowledge, do not nullify your charities with insult and harm; like the one who spends his money in vanity to show the people, and he does not acknowledge God and the Last day. His example is like a stone on which there is dust, then it is subjected to heavy rain, which leaves it bare. They cannot do anything with what they earned; and God does not guide the ingrates.
The example of those who spend their money seeking God's grace, and to save themselves, is like the example of a garden on a high ground which is subjected to a heavy rain, and because of that it produces double its crop! If no heavy rain comes, then light rain is enough. God is Seer over all you do.
Does anyone of you desire that he have a garden with palm trees and grapevines, and rivers flowing beneath it, and in it for him are all kinds of fruits, then he is afflicted with old age and his progeny is weak, and a whirlwind with fire strikes it and it all burns? It is thus that God makes clear for you the signs that you may reflect.
O you who acknowledge, spend from the good things that you have earned, and from what We have brought forth from the earth. Do not choose the rotten out of it to give, while you would not take it yourselves unless you close your eyes regarding it. Know that God is Rich, Praiseworthy.
The devil promises you poverty and orders you to evil, while God promises forgiveness from Him and favor. God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.
He grants wisdom to whom He chooses, and whoever is granted wisdom, has been given much good. Only those with intelligence will take heed.
Whatever you spend out of your monies, or whatever you pledge as a promise, certainly, God knows it. The wicked have no supporters.
If you declare your charity, then it is acceptable; but if you conceal it and give it to the poor, then that is better for you. It depreciates some of your sins; and God is Ever-aware of all that you do.
You are not responsible for their guidance, but it is God who will guide whomever He wishes. Whatever you spend out of goodness is for yourselves. Anything you spend should be in seeking God's presence. Whatever you spend out of goodness will be retuned to you, and you will not be wronged.*
As for the poor who face hardship in the cause of God, and cannot leave the land; the ignorant ones think they are rich from their abstention; you know them by their marks, they do not ask the people repeatedly. What you spend out of goodness, God is fully aware of it.
Those who spend their money in the night and in the day, secretly and openly, they will have their reward at their Lord, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve.
Those who consume usury, do not rise except as the one who is being beaten by the devil out of direct touch. That is because they have said, "Trade is like usury." Indeed God has made trade lawful, yet He has forbidden usury. Whoever has received understanding from His Lord and ceases, then he will be forgiven for what was before this and his case will be with God. But whoever returns, then they are the people of the fire, in it they will abide eternally.*
God wipes out the usury and grants growth to the charities. God does not like any ingrate sinner.
Those who acknowledge and do the reforms, and observe the Contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, they will have their rewards at their Lord and there is no fear over them nor will they grieve.
O you who acknowledge, be conscientious of God and give up what is left of the usury if you are those who have acknowledged.
If you will not do this, then take notice of a war from God and His messenger. However, if you repent, then you will have back your principal money, you will not be wronged nor will you wrong.
If the person is facing insolvency, then you shall wait until he becomes able. If you relinquish it as a charity it is better for you if you knew.
Be conscientious of a day when you will be returned to God then every person will be paid what it has earned, they will not be wronged.
O you who acknowledge, if you borrow debt for a specified period, then you shall record it. Let a scribe of justice record it for you. No scribe should refuse to record as God has taught him. Let him record and let the person who is borrowing dictate to him, and let him be conscientious of God, and let him not reduce from it anything. If the borrower is mentally incapable, weak or cannot dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate with justice; and bring two witnesses from amongst your men. If they are not two men, then a man and two women from whom you will accept their testimony, so that if one of them errs, then one can remind the other. The witnesses should not decline if they are called, and you should not fail to record it no matter how small or large including the time of repayment. That is more just with God and better for the testimony, and better that you do not have doubts; except if it is a trade to be done on the spot between you, then there is no blame on you if you do not record it. Have witnesses/evidence if you trade. No scribe shall be harmed nor any witness; for if you do so then it is vileness on your part. Be conscientious of God so that God teaches you; and God is aware of all things.*
If you are traveling or do not find a scribe, then a pledge of collateral. If you trust each other then let the one who was entrusted deliver his trust, and let him be conscientious of God, and do not hold back the testimony. Whoever holds it back, then he has sinned in his heart; God is aware of what you do.
To God is what is in the heavens and in the earth, and if you declare what is in your minds or hide it, God will call you to account for it. He will forgive whom He wishes, and punish whom He wishes, and God is capable of all things.
The messenger acknowledges in what was sent down to him from his Lord and those who have acknowledged. All acknowledged God, His angels, His books, and His messengers, "We do not discriminate between any of His messengers;" and they said, "We hear and obey, forgive us O Lord, and to you is our destiny."*
God does not impose a person beyond its capacity. For it is what it earns, and against it is what it earns. "Our Lord, do not mind us if we forget or make mistakes. Our Lord, do not place a burden upon us as You have placed upon those before us. Our Lord, do not burden us beyond our power; pardon us, and forgive us, and have compassion on us; You are our patron, help us against the ingrates."*
A1L30M40*
God; there is no god, except He; the Living, the Sustainer.
He sent down to you the book with truth, authenticating what is present with it; and He sent down the Torah and the Injeel...
Before; He sent down the Criterion as guidance for the people. For those who become unappreciative of God's signs, they will have a tough retribution, and God is Noble, exacting in Revenge.
For God nothing is hidden in the earth or in the heaven.
He is the One who designs you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god but He, the Noble, the Wise.
He is the One who sent down to you the book, from which there are definite signs; they are the essence of the book; and others, which are multiple-meaning. As for those who have disease in their hearts, eager to cause confusion and eager to derive their interpretation, they will follow what is multiple-meaning from it. But none knows their meaning except God and those who are well founded in knowledge; they say, "We acknowledge it, all is from our Lord." None will remember except the people of intellect.*
"Our Lord, do not make our hearts deviate after You have guided us, and grant us from You a mercy; You are the Grantor."
"Our Lord, You are the Gatherer of the people for a day in which there is no doubt; God does not break His appointment."
As for those who did not appreciate, neither their money nor their children will avail them anything from God. They are the fuel for the fire.
Like the behavior of the people of Pharaoh and those before them. They rejected Our signs, so God took them for their sins. God is severe in retribution.*
Say to those who did not appreciate, "You will be defeated and gathered towards hell. What a miserable abode!"
There was a sign for you in the two groups that met. One was fighting in the cause of God, and the other was ingrate. They thus saw them as twice their number with their eyes. God supports with His victory whomever He wills. In this is a lesson for those with vision.
It has been adorned for people to love the desire of women, buildings, ornaments made from gold and silver, trained horses, the livestock, and fields. These are the enjoyment of the world, and with God is the best place of return.*
Say, "Shall I inform you of what is greater than all this? For those who are aware, at their Lord there will be gardens with rivers flowing beneath, abiding there eternally, and purified mates, and an acceptance from God. God is Seer of the servants."
The ones who say, "Our Lord, we acknowledge, so forgive us our sins, and spare us the retribution of the fire."
The patient, the truthful, the devout, the givers, and the seekers of forgiveness in the late periods of the night.
God bears witness that there is no god but He; as do the angels, and those with knowledge; He is standing with justice. There is no god but Him, the Noble, the Wise.*
The system with God is to peacefully surrender/submit (islam). Those who received the book did not dispute except after the knowledge came to them out of jealousy between them. Whoever does not appreciate God's signs, then God is swift in computation.*
If they debate with you, then say, "I have peacefully surrendered myself to God, as well as those who follow me." In addition, say to those who were given the book and the Gentiles: "Have you peacefully surrendered?" If they have peacefully surrendered then they are guided; but if they turn away, then you are only to deliver. God is watcher over the servants.*
Those who do not appreciate God's signs and kill the prophets unjustly, and kill those who order justice from amongst the people; give them the good news of a painful retribution.
These are the ones whose works will be lost in this world, and in the Hereafter, they will have no supporters.
Did you not see those who were given a portion of the book being invited to God's book to judge between them, then a group of them turn away while they are adverse?
That is because they said, "The fire will not touch us except a few number of days," and they were arrogant by what they invented in their system.*
How shall it be when We gather them on the day in which there is no doubt; every person shall receive what it has earned, and they will not be wronged.
Say, "Our god, Ruler of sovereignty; you grant sovereignty to whom You please, revoke sovereignty from whom You please, dignify whom You please, and humiliate whom You please; in Your hand is goodness. You are capable of all things."*
"You blend the night into the day, and blend the day into the night; and you bring the living out of the dead, and bring the dead out of the living; and You provide for whom You please with no computation."
Let not those who acknowledge take the ingrates as allies instead of those who acknowledge. Whoever does so will have nothing with God, for you are to be cautious of them for a particular reason. Moreover, God warns you of Himself, and to God is the destiny.
Say, "Whether you hide what is in your chests or reveal it, God knows." He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and God is capable of all things.
The day every person will find what good it had done present, and what bad it had done; it wishes that between them was a great distance. God warns you of Himself, and God is Kind towards the servants.
Say, "If you love God then follow me so God will love you and forgive your sins." God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Say, "Obey God and the messenger." But if they turn away, then God does not like the ingrates.*
God has chosen Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of Imran over the worlds.
A progeny each from the other, and God is Hearer, Knower.
When the wife of Imran said, "My Lord, I have vowed to You what is in my womb, dedicated, so accept it from me. You are the Hearer, the Knower."
So when she delivered she said, "My Lord, I have delivered a female," and God is fully aware of what she delivered, "The male is not like the female, and I have named her Mary, and I seek refuge for her and her progeny with You from the outcast devil."*
So her Lord accepted her with a good acceptance, and made her grow like a flower, and charged Zechariah with her. Every time Zechariah entered upon her in the temple enclosure, he found provisions with her. He said, "O Mary, from where did you get this?" She said, "It is from God, God provides for whom He wishes without computation."
It was then that Zechariah called on his Lord, he said, "My Lord, grant me from You a good progeny; You are hearer of the prayers."
The angels called to him while he was standing and praying in the temple enclosure: "God gives you good tidings of John, authenticating a word from God, respectable, protected, and a prophet from the reformers."
He said, "My Lord, how can I have a son when old age has reached me and my wife is sterile?" He said, "It is as such that God does what He pleases."
He said, "My Lord, make for me a sign" He said, "Your sign is not to speak to the people for three days except by symbol, and remember your Lord greatly, and glorify at dusk and dawn."*
The angels said, "O Mary, God has selected you and cleansed you, and He has chosen you over the women of the worlds."
"O Mary, be devoted to your Lord and prostrate and kneel with those who kneel."
This is from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. You were not with them when they drew straws as to which one of them will be charged with Mary; you were not with them when they disputed.
The angels said, "O Mary, God gives good news of a word from Him. His name is the Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary. Honorable in this world and in the Hereafter, and from among those who are made close."*
"He speaks to the people from the cradle, and as an adult; and he is among the reformers."
She said, "My Lord, how can I have a son when no human has touched me?" He said, "It is thus that God creates what He wills, when He decrees a command, He merely says to it 'Be,' and it becomes."
He teaches him the book and the Wisdom, the Torah and the Injeel.
As a messenger to the Children of Israel: "I have come to you with a sign from your Lord; that I create for you from clay the form of a bird, then I blow into it and it becomes a bird by God's leave, and I heal the blind and the lepers, and give life to the dead by God's leave, and I can tell you what you have eaten, and what you have stored in your homes. In that is a sign for you if you have acknowledged."
"Authenticating what is present with me of the Torah, and to make lawful some of what was forbidden to you; and I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so be aware of God and obey me."
"God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him, this is a Straight Path."*
So when Jesus felt their rejection, he said, "Who are my supporters towards God?" The disciples said, "We are God's supporters, we acknowledge God and we bear witness that we have peacefully surrendered."*
"Our Lord, we acknowledged what You have sent down; we followed the messenger, so record us with those who bear witness."
They schemed and God schemed, but God is the best schemer.
God said, "O Jesus, I will terminate you, and raise you to Me, and cleanse you of those who have rejected, and make those who have followed you above those who rejected, until the day of Resurrection; then to Me is your return so I will judge between all of you in what you were disputing."*
"As for those who did not appreciate, I will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the Hereafter; they will have no supporters."
"As for those who acknowledged and did good works, We will pay them their reward; God does not like the wicked."
This We recite to you is from the revelation and the wise reminder.
The example of Jesus with God is similar to that of Adam; He created him from dust, then He said to him, "Be," and he became.*
The truth is from your Lord; so do not be of those who are doubtful.
Whoever debates with you in this after the knowledge has come to you, then say, "Let us call our children and your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then, let us call out, and we shall make God's curse upon the liars."
This is the narration of truth, there is no god but God; and God is the Noble, the Wise.
If they turn away, then God is aware of the corruptors.
Say, "O people of the book, let us come to a common statement between us and between you; that we do not serve except God, and do not set up anything at all with Him, and that none of us takes each other as lords beside God." If they turn away, then say, "Bear witness that we have peacefully surrendered."*
"O people of the book, why do you debate us about Abraham when the Torah and the Injeel were not sent down except after him? Do you not reason?"
Here you have debated in what you knew; so why then do you debate in what you do not know? God knows while you may not know.
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Nazarene, but he was a monotheist who peacefully surrendered; he was not of those who set up partners.
The closest people to Abraham are those who followed him, this prophet, and those who acknowledged; and God is the ally of those who acknowledge.
A group from the people of the book wished that they could misguide you, but they only misguide themselves and they do not notice.
O people of the book, why do you reject God's signs while you are bearing witness?
O people of the book, why do you dress the truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know?*
A group among the people of the book said, "Acknowledge what was revealed to those who acknowledged during the beginning of the day, and reject it by the end of it; perhaps they will return."
"Do not acknowledge except for those who follow your system."-- say, "The guidance is God's guidance."-- "That anyone should be given similar to what you have been given, or that they debate with you at your Lord." Say, "The bounty is in God's hand, He gives it to whom He chooses, and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable."
He specifies with His mercy whomever He chooses, and God is with Great Bounty.
Among the people of the book are those whom if you entrust him with a large amount he gives it back to you, and there are those whom if you entrust with one gold coin he will not return it to you unless you are standing over him. That is because they said, "We have no obligation towards the Gentiles." They say about God lies while knowing.*
Indeed, anyone who fulfils his pledge and is conscientious, then God loves the conscientious.
The ones that purchase with God's pledge and their oaths a small price, those will have no portion in the Hereafter. God will not speak to them nor look at them on the day of Resurrection, nor purify them, and they will have a painful retribution.
From amongst them is a group that twists their tongues with the book so that you may count it from the book, while it is not from the book, and they say it is from God while it is not from God, and they knowingly say lies about God.
It is not for a human that God would give him the book, the authority, and the prophethood, then he would say to the people: "Be servants to me rather than to God!", rather: "Be devotees to what you have been taught of the book, and to what you studied."*
Nor does he order you that you take the angels and the prophets as lords. Would he order you to reject after you have peacefully surrendered?*
God took a covenant from the prophets: "For what I have given you of the book and wisdom, then a messenger will come to you authenticating what is with you. You will acknowledge him and support him." He said, "Do you testify, and agree to this burden?" they said, "We testify." He said, "Then bear witness, and I am with you bearing witness."*
Whoever turns away after that, they are the wicked ones.
 Is it other than God's system that they desire, when those in the heavens and the earth have peacefully surrendered to Him voluntarily or by force? To Him they will be returned.
Say, "We acknowledge God and what was sent down to us and what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, the Patriarchs, and what was given to Moses, Jesus and the prophets from their Lord. We do not discriminate between them, and to Him we peacefully surrender."
Whoever follows other than peace/peaceful surrender as a system, it will not be accepted from him, and in the Hereafter he is of the losers.*
How would God guide a people who have rejected after acknowledging and they witnessed that the messenger was true, and the clear evidences had come to them? God does not guide the wicked people.
For these, the consequence will be that God's curse will be upon them as well as that of the angels and the people all together!
Eternally they will abide in it, the retribution will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved;
Except those who repent after this and reform, then God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Those who have rejected after their acknowledgement, then increased in rejection, their repentance will not be accepted; they are the strayers.
Those who have rejected and died while they are ingrates, if the earth full of gold were to be ransomed with it, it would not be accepted from any of them. For these there will be a painful retribution and they will have no supporters.
You will not reach piety until you spend from what you love. Whatever you spend, God is aware of it.
All the food used to be lawful to the Children of Israel except what Israel forbade for himself before the Torah was sent down. Say, "Bring the Torah and recite it if you are truthful."
Whoever invents lies about God after this, these are the wicked.
Say, "God bears truth. Follow the creed of Abraham, monotheism, and he was not of those who set up partners."
The first house established for the public is the one in Bakka, blessed, and guidance for the worlds.*
In it are clear signs: the place of Abraham. Whoever enters it will be secure. Pilgrimage to the sanctuary is a duty from God for the people who can afford a means to it. Whoever rejects, and then God has no need of the worlds.
Say, "O people of the book, why do you reject God's signs, while God is witness over what you do?"
Say, "O people of the book, why do you repel from the path of God those who acknowledge? You wish to twist it while you were witness. God is not oblivious to what you do."
O you who acknowledge, if you obey a group of those who received the book they will turn you after your acknowledgement into ingrates!
How can you reject when God's signs are being recited to you and His messenger is among you? Whoever holds firmly to God, has been guided to the straight path.
O you who acknowledge, be aware of God as He deserves awareness, and do not die except as ones who have peacefully surrendered.
Hold firmly to the rope of God, all of you, and do not be separated. Remember God's blessing upon you when you were enemies and He united your hearts, then you became, with His blessing, brothers; and you were on the verge of a pit of fire and He saved you from it. Thus, God clarifies for you His signs, so that you may be guided.
Let there be a nation from amongst you that calls towards goodness, and orders recognized norms, and deters from evil. These are the successful ones.
 Do not be like those who separated and differed after the proof had come to them. For them is a painful retribution.*
The day on which faces will be brightened and faces will be darkened; as for those whose faces will be darkened: "Did you reject after acknowledging? Taste the retribution for what you rejected."
As for those whose faces are brightened, they are in God's mercy, in it they abide eternally.
These are God's signs; We recite them to you with truth. God does not want wickedness for the worlds.
To God is all that is in the heavens and in the earth; and to God the events will be returned.
You became the best nation that emerged for the people; you order recognized norms, deter from evil, and trust/acknowledge God. If the people of the book acknowledged, it would have been better for them; from amongst them are acknowledgers, but most remain wicked.*
They will not harm you except in being an annoyance, and if they fight you they will turn and flee; then they will not be supported.
They are stricken with humiliation wherever they are found, except through a rope from God and a rope from the people. They earned God's wrath and were stricken with humiliation; that is because they were being unappreciative of God's signs and killing the prophets without just cause. This is the consequence of their disobedience and transgression.
They are not all the same, from the people of the book are an upright nation; they recite God's signs during parts of the night and they prostrate.
They acknowledge God and the Last day, promote recognized norms and deter from evil, and they hasten in goodness; these are of the reformed ones.
What they do of good will not be turned back, and God is aware of the conscientious.
As for those who were unappreciative, neither their money nor their children will avail them anything from God. These are the people of the fire, where they abide eternally.
The example of what they spend in this world is like a wind in which there is a frost; it afflicts the field of the people who wronged themselves, and thus destroys it. God did not wrong them, but it was themselves that they wronged.
O you who acknowledge do not take protection from any besides yourselves; they will only disrupt you greatly. They wish that you suffer; the hatred appears from their mouths and what their chests hide is greater! We have made clear for you the signs if you reason.
Here you love them while they do not love you, and you acknowledge the whole book. When they meet you they say, "We acknowledge," and when they are alone they bite their fingers out of frustration at you. Say, "Die in your frustration, God is aware of what is in the chests."*
If any good befalls you it disturbs them, and if any bad befalls you they rejoice with it. If you are patient and aware, their planning will not harm you at all. Over all they do God is Encompassing.
Recall when you departed from your family to prepare for those who acknowledged, their stations for battle, and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
When the two parties from among you were concerned about their failure, though God was their ally. In God those who acknowledge should trust.
God had granted you victory at Badr while you had been the lesser, so be aware of God that you may be thankful.
When you said to those who acknowledge: "Is it not enough for you that your Lord would supply you with three thousand of the angels sent down?"
Indeed, if you are patient and are aware and they come and attack you, He will supply you with five thousand of the well-trained angels.
God did not give this except as good news to you, and so that your hearts may be assured with it. Victory is only from God, the Noble, the Wise.
Thus, He would sever a group of those who reject, or disgrace them; then they will turn back frustrated.
You will have no say in the matter, for He may pardon them, or punish them for their wickedness.
To God is what is in the heavens and the earth, He forgives whom He pleases, and He punishes whom He pleases; and God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, do not consume usury multiplying over, and be aware of God that you may succeed.*
Be aware of the fire that has been prepared for the ingrates.
Obey God and the messenger so that you may obtain mercy.
Race towards forgiveness from your Lord and a paradise whose width encompasses the width of the heavens and the earth; it has been prepared for the conscientious.
The ones who spend in prosperity and adversity, repress anger, and pardon the people; God loves the good doers.
If they commit any evil, or wrong themselves, they remember God and seek forgiveness for their sins. Who can forgive the sins except God? They do not persist in what they have done while they know.
To these the reward will be forgiveness from their Lord and gardens with rivers flowing underneath, eternally abiding in it. Excellent is the reward of the workers.
Many nations have come before you. So roam the earth and see what the consequence of the liars was.
This is a clarification for the people and a guidance and advice for the conscientious.
Do not be weak, and do not grieve, for you are superior, if you have acknowledged.
If you are wounded, then know that the other group is also wounded. Such are the days, We alternate them between the people, so that God will know those who acknowledge, and so He may make witnesses from among you; and God does not like the wicked.
God will refine those who acknowledge and He will destroy the ingrates.
Or did you calculate that you would enter paradise without God knowing those who would strive amongst you and knowing those who are patient?
You used to long for death before you came upon it, and now you see it right in front of you!
Muhammad is but a messenger, like many messengers that have passed before him. If he dies or gets killed, will you turn back on your heels? Whoever turns back on his heels, he will not harm God in the least. God will reward the thankful.
It is not permitted for a person to die except by God's leave in an appointed record. Whoever wants the rewards of this world We give him of it, and whoever wants the reward of the Hereafter, We give him of it. We will reward the thankful.
Many a prophet had a large number of devotees fighting with him. They did not waver by what afflicted them in the cause of God, nor did they become weak, nor did they become discouraged; and God loves the steadfast.
They said nothing but: "Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our shortcomings in our responsibility, and make firm our foothold, and grant us victory over the ingrates."
So God gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the Hereafter; and God loves the good doers.
O you who acknowledge, if you obey those who have rejected, then they will turn you back on your heels and you will turn back as losers.
It is God who is your Patron, and He is the best victor.*
We will cast fear in the hearts of those who rejected, because of what they have set up besides God while He never sent down any authority to do so, and their destiny is the fire. Miserable is the abode of the wicked.
God has fulfilled His promise to you, that you would overwhelm them by His leave; but then you failed and disputed in the matter and disobeyed after He showed you what you had sought. Some of you want this world, and some of you want the Hereafter. Then He let you retreat from them that He may test you; and He has pardoned you. God is with great favor over those who have acknowledged.
For you were climbing the hill and would not even glance towards anyone, and the messenger was calling you from behind. Therefore, He gave you worry to replace your worry, so that you would not have sadness by what has passed you, or for what afflicted you, and God is Ever-aware of what you do.
Then after the worry, He sent down to you sanctity in sleepiness, overtaking a group of you; while another group was worried about themselves; they were thinking about God other than the truth, the thoughts of the days of ignorance. They say, "Why are we involved in this affair?" Say, "The entire affair is up to God." They hide in their persons what they do not show to you; they say, "If we had a say in this affair then none of us would have been killed here." Say, "If you were inside your own homes, then the ones who have been marked for death would have gone forth to their resting place." God will test what is in your chests and bring out what is in your hearts. God is Knowledgeable as to what is in the chests.
The day the two armies met, the devil caused some of you to turn away, because of what they had gained. God has pardoned them, for God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge do not be like those who rejected and said to their brothers when they were marching in the land or on the offensive: "If they were here with us they would not have died nor been killed." God will make this a source of grief in their hearts, and God grants life and death, and God is watching over what you do.
If you are killed in the cause of God or die, then forgiveness from God and mercy is far greater than all they can put together.
If you die or are killed, then to God you will be gathered.
It was a mercy from God that you were soft towards them; had you been harsh and mean hearted, they would have dispersed from you; so pardon them and ask forgiveness for them, and consult them in the matter; but when you are convinced, then put your trust in God; God loves those who trust.*
If God grants you victory then none can defeat you, and if He abandons you then who can grant you victory after Him? In God, those who acknowledge should put their trust.*
It was not for any prophet that he should embezzle, and he who embezzles will be brought with what he has embezzled on the day of Resurrection, then every person will be given what it has earned without being wronged.
Is one who follows the pleasure of God, as one who draws the wrath of God and whose abode is hell? What a miserable destiny!
They are in degrees with God, and God is seer of what they do.
God has bestowed favor upon those who acknowledge by sending them a messenger from amongst themselves reciting His signs, improving them and teaching them the book and the wisdom, though they were before in manifest confusion.
It was when you suffered setback. Even though you afflicted them with twice as much setback, you said, "Where is this coming from?" Say, "It is from yourselves." God is capable of all things.
What you suffered on the day the two armies met was by God's leave, and to let those who acknowledge know.
To let those who are hypocrites know, that they were told: "Come fight in the cause of God or defend," they said, "If we knew how to fight we would have followed you." That day they were closer to rejection then they were to acknowledgement. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts, and God knows well what they conceal.
Those who remained and said to their brothers, "If they obeyed us they would not have been killed." Say, "Then avert death away from yourselves if you are truthful!"
Do not count that those who are killed in the sake of God are dead. No, they are alive at their Lord receiving provisions.*
Happy with what God has granted them from His favor, and they rejoice for those who have yet to follow them. There is no fear over them nor do they grieve.*
They rejoice with God's blessing and bounty; God will not waste the reward of those who acknowledge.
For those who have answered God and the messenger after they were afflicted with wounds, and for those of them who did good and were aware is a great reward.
The ones who the people said to them: "The people have gathered against you, so be fearful of them," but it only increased their acknowledgement and they said, "God is enough for us, and He is the best defender."
So they came back with a blessing from God and a bounty, no harm would touch them. They had followed the pleasure of God, and God is the One with great bounty.
It is only the devil trying to create fear for his allies, so do not fear them, but fear Me if you have acknowledged.
Do not be saddened by those who rush into rejection. They will not harm God in the least. God does not wish to make for them any share in the Hereafter, and they will have a great retribution.
Those who have purchased rejection with acknowledgement will not harm God in the least, and they will have a painful retribution.
Those who do not appreciate should not count that We are providing for them out of the goodness of themselves. We are only providing for them so that they may increase in transgression, and they will have a humiliating retribution.
God was not to leave those who acknowledge as they were without distinguishing the rotten from the good. God was not to let you know the future, but God chooses from His messengers whom He wishes; so acknowledge God and His messengers. If you acknowledge and be aware, then you will have a great reward.
Those who are stingy with what God has given them of His bounty should not count that it is good for them; no, it is evil for them. They will be surrounded by what they were stingy with on the day of Resurrection. To God will be the inheritance of the heavens and the earth; and God is Ever-aware of what you do.
God has heard the words of those who said, "God is poor and we are rich!" We will record what they said as well as their killing of the prophets without just cause. We will say, "Taste the retribution of the fire!"
This is for what their hands have brought forth, and God does not wrong the servants.
Those who said, "God has pledged to us that we should not acknowledge a messenger unless he brings us an offering which the fire will not devour." Say, "Messengers have come to you before me with proof and with what you have said, so why did you kill them if you were truthful?"*
If they reject you, then messengers before you were also rejected. They came with proof and the Psalms, and the book of enlightenment.
Every person will taste death, and you will be recompensed your dues on the day of Resurrection. Whoever escaped the fire and entered into paradise, he has indeed won. This worldly life is nothing more than the enjoyment of vanity.
We will test you with your wealth and with yourselves, and you will hear from those who have been given the book before you and from those who set up partners much annoyance. If you strive and be aware, then these are affairs of great resolve.*
God took the covenant of those who were given the book: "You will proclaim to the people and not conceal it." However, they threw it behind their backs and purchased with it a cheap price. Miserable indeed is what they have purchased.
Do not count that those who are happy with what they have been given, and they love to be praised for what they did not do; do not think they are saved from the punishment. For them is a painful retribution.
To God is the sovereignty of heavens and earth, and God is capable of all things.
In the creation of heavens and earth, and the difference between night and day, are signs for those with intelligence.*
Those who remember God while standing, and sitting, and on their sides, and they ponder over the creation of the heavens and the earth: "Our Lord you did not create this without purpose, be You glorified, and spare us the retribution of the fire!"*
"Our Lord, whoever You admit to the fire has been disgraced. The wicked will have no supporters."
"Our Lord, we have heard a caller inviting to the acknowledgement: Acknowledge your Lord, so we have acknowledged. Our Lord forgive us our evil deeds and remit our sins, and take us with the obedient ones."
"Our Lord, and grant us what You have promised through Your messengers, and do not embarrass us on the day of Resurrection. You do not break the promise."
Their Lord answered them: "I do not waste the work of any worker from among you, be you male or female, you are all as each other. For those who emigrated and were driven-out from their homes and were harmed in My cause, and they fought and were killed, I will remit for them their sins and admit them to paradises with rivers flowing beneath; a reward from God; and God has the best reward."
Do not be deceived by the success of those ingrates throughout the land.
A brief enjoyment, then their abode is hell. What a miserable abode!
As for those who are aware of their Lord, they will have paradises with rivers flowing beneath; eternally they reside in it as a dwelling from God. What is with God is better for the righteous.
Among the people of the book are those who acknowledge God, what was sent down to you and what was sent down to them. They revere God and they do not purchase with God's signs a cheap price. These will have their reward with their Lord. God is quick in computation.
O you who acknowledge, be patient, call for patience, bond together, and be aware of God that you may succeed.*
O people, be aware of your Lord who has created you from one person and He created from it its mate and sent forth from both many men and women; and be aware of God whom you ask about, and the relatives. God is watcher over you.*
Give the orphans their money; do not replace the good with the bad, and do not consume their money to your money, for truly it is a great sin!
If you fear that you cannot be just to fatherless orphans, then marry those whom you see fit from the women, two, and three, and four. But if you fear you will not be fair then only one, or whom you already have contract with. So that you do not commit injustice and suffer hardship.*
Give the women their property willingly, and if they remit any of it to you of their own will, then you may take it with good feelings.
Do not give the immature ones your money, which God has entrusted to you. Spend on them from it and clothe them, and speak to them nicely.
Test the orphans until they reach the age of marriage, then if you determine in them sound judgment, then give them their wealth, and do not deliberately consume it wastefully or quickly before they grow up. Whoever is rich, then let him not claim anything, and if he is poor then let him consume only properly. If you give to them their wealth, then make a witness for them, and God is enough for Reckoning.
For the men is a portion from what the parents and the relatives left behind, and for the women is a portion from what the parents and relatives left behind, be it little or much; an imposed portion.*
If the distribution is attended by the relatives, the orphans, and the needy, then you shall give them part of it and say to them a kind saying.
What if it was them who had left behind a weak progeny? Would they not be concerned for them? Let them revere God and let them say what is appropriate.
Those who consume the money of the orphans illicitly, in fact are consuming fire in their bellies, and they will end up in a blaze.
God directs you regarding the inheritance of your children, "To the male shall be as that given to two females. If they are only females and more than two, then they will have two thirds of what is inherited. If there is only one female, then she will have one-half, and to his parents each one of them one sixth of what is inherited if he has children. If he has no children and his parents are the heirs, then to his mother is one third; if he has siblings then to his mother is one sixth. All after a will is carried through or a debt. Your parents and your children, you do not know which is closer to you in benefit, a directive from God, God is Knowledgeable, Wise."*
For you is half of what your wives leave behind if they have no children; but if they have a child then to you is one quarter of what they leave behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. To them is one quarter of what you leave behind if you have no child; but if you have a child then to them is one eighth of what you leave behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. If a man or a woman has no one, but has a brother or sister, then to each one of them is one sixth, but if they are more than this then they are to share in one third. All after a will is carried through or a debt, which does not cause harm. A directive from God, and God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate.*
These are God's limits, and whoever obeys God and His messenger, He will admit him to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, eternally abiding therein. This is the greatest victory.
Whoever disobeys God and His messenger, and transgresses His limits, He will admit him to a fire in which he abides eternally, and he will have a humiliating retribution.
The women who commit lewdness, you shall bring four witnesses over them from amongst you; if they bear witness, then you shall restrict them in the homes until death takes them, or God makes for them a way out.*
The two who commit it from amongst you, then you shall reprimand them. If they repent and amend, then leave them alone. God is Redeemer, Compassionate.*
God's acceptance of repentance is only for those who commit sin out of ignorance and then repent soon after; these will be forgiven by God, God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
There will be no repentance for those who commit sin until death comes upon one of them, then he says, "I repent now!" Nor there will be repentance for those who die while they are ingrates. To those We have prepared a painful retribution.*
O you who acknowledge, it is not lawful for you to inherit the women by force, nor that you become harsh with them to take away some of what you have given them, unless they commit a clear lewdness. Live with them in kindness. If you dislike them, then perhaps you may dislike something and God makes in it much good.*
If you wish to replace one mate instead of another, and you have given one of them a large amount, then do not take anything from it. Would you take it by falsehood while it is clearly a sin?
How can you take it when you have become intimate with each other, and the women have taken from you a strong covenant?
Do not marry what your fathers had married from the women, except what has already been done. It is lewdness, abhorrence, and a bad path.
Forbidden for you are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your fathers' sisters, your mothers' sisters, the daughters of your brother, and the daughters of your sister, your foster mothers who suckled you, your sisters from suckling, the mothers of your wives, and your step-daughters residing in your homes from your wives which you have already consummated the marriage with; if you have not consummated the marriage then there is no sin upon you; and the wives of your sons that are from your seed, and that you join between two sisters except what has already been done. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
The women who are already married, except those whom you have contractual rights, God's book is over you; and permitted for you is what is beyond this, if you are seeking with your money to be protected and not for illicit sex. As for those whom you have already had joy with them, then you shall give them their wage as an obligation. There is no sin upon you for what you agree to after the obligation. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.*
Whoever of you cannot afford to marry the acknowledging independent women, then from those young women whom you have contractual rights. God is more aware of your faith; you are equal to one another. You shall marry them with the permission of their family and give them their wage in kindness, to be protected, not for illicit sex or for taking lovers. If they become protected, then any of them who come with lewdness shall have half the punishment of what is for the independent women of the retribution. This is for those who fear hardship from among you. But if you are patient it is better for you, and God is Forgiver, Compassionate.*
God wants to make clear for you and guide you to the ways of those before you, and pardon you, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
God wants to pardon you, but those who follow their lusts want that you would be diverted into a great diversion.
God wants to make easy for you; and humankind was created weak.*
O you who acknowledge, do not consume your money between you unjustly, except through a trade, which is mutually agreed by you. Do not kill yourselves; God is Compassionate towards you.
Whoever does so out of animosity and transgression, We will cast him into a fire; and this for God is very easy.
If you avoid the major sins that you are forbidden against, then We will cancel your existing sins and admit you to a generous entrance.
Do not envy what God has favored some of you over others. For the men is a portion of what they gained, and for the women is a portion of what they gained. Ask God from His favor, God is knowledgeable over all things.
For each We have made inheritors for what was left behind by the parents and the relatives. Those whom are dependent on you, you shall give them their portion. God is witness over all things.
The men are to support the women by what God has gifted them over one another and for what they spend of their money. The reformed women are devotees and protectors of privacy what God has protected. As for those women from whom you fear disloyalty, then you shall advise them, abandon them in the bedchamber, and separate them; if they obey you, then do not seek a way over them; God is High, Great.*
If you fear a split between them, then send a judge from his family and a judge from hers. If they want to reconcile, then God will bring them together. God is Knowledgeable, Ever-aware.*
Serve God and do not set up anything with Him, and be kind to the parents, and the relatives, and the needy, and the neighbor who is of kin, and the neighbor next door, and close friend, and the traveler, and those with whom you have contractual rights. God does not like the arrogant, the boastful.*
Those who are stingy and order the people to stinginess, and they conceal what God has given them from His bounty. We have prepared for these ingrates a painful retribution.
Those who spend their money to show-off to the people, and they do not acknowledge God or the Last day. Whoever has the devil as his companion, then what a miserable companion!
What would bother them if they acknowledged God and the Last day and spent from God's provisions? God is aware of them.
Indeed, God does not wrong an atom's weight; and if it is good He will double it. He grants from Himself a great reward.
How is it then when We bring forth from every nation a witness, and bring you as a witness over these?*
On that day those who rejected and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth would swallow them; but they cannot hide anything said from God.
O you who acknowledge, do not come near the contact prayer while you are drunk, until you know what you are saying. Nor if you have had intercourse, unless traveling, until you bathe. If you are ill, or traveling, or one of you come from the bathroom, or you had sexual contact with the women, and could not find water: then you shall seek clean soil and wipe your faces and hands. God is Pardoning, Forgiving.*
Did you not see those who have been given a portion of the book? They purchased straying, and they want you to stray from the path.
God is fully aware of your enemies; and God is enough as a supporter, and God is enough as a victor.
From amongst the Jews there are those who take the words out of context, and they say, "We hear and disobey, and listen but let not any listen, and shepherd us," in a twisting of their tongues and as a mockery of the system! Had they said, "We hear and obey, and listen, and watch over us," it would have been better for them and more upright; but God has cursed them for their rejection, they do not acknowledge except very little.*
O you who have received the book, acknowledge what We have sent down authenticating what is with you, before We cast down faces and turn them on their backs or curse them as the people of the Sabbath were cursed. God's will is always done.
God does not forgive that partners be set up with Him, and He forgives what is beside that for whom He wills. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed invented a great sin.*
Did you not see those who exalt themselves? No, it is God who exalts whom He wills, and they will not be wronged in the least.
See how they invent upon God the lies; is that not enough as a clear sin?
Did you not see those who were given a portion of the book, they trust superstition and aggression, and they say of the ingrates, "Those are better guided than these who acknowledged the path."
These are the ones whom God has cursed, and whomever God curses, you will not find for him a victor.
Or would they have a portion of the sovereignty? If so, then they would not give the people a speck.
Or do they envy the people for what God has given them of His bounty? We have given the descendants of Abraham the book and the wisdom; We have given them a great power.
Some of them acknowledged it, and some of them turned from it. Hell suffices as a flame.
Those who have rejected Our signs, We will admit them to a fire. Every time their skins are cooked, We replace them with other skin that they may taste the retribution. God is Noble, Wise.*
Those who acknowledge and do well, We will admit them to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, eternally they abide therein. In it they will have pure spouses, and We will admit them to a vast shade.
God orders you to delegate the responsibilities to those who are qualified. If you judge between the people, then you shall judge with justice. It is always the best that God prescribes for you. God is Hearer, Seer.*
O you who acknowledge, obey God and obey the messenger and those entrusted amongst you. But if you dispute in any matter, then you shall refer it to God and His messenger, if you acknowledge God and the Last day. That is better and a more suitable solution.*
Did you not see those who claimed they acknowledged what was sent down to you and what was sent before you? They wanted to seek judgment through aggression, while they were ordered to reject it. It is the devil who wants to lead them astray.
If they are told, "Come to what God has sent down and to the messenger," you see the hypocrites turning away from you strongly.
Why then, when a tragedy befalls them for what their hands have brought forth do they come to you swearing by God that they only wanted to do good and reconcile?
These are a people whom God knows what is in their hearts, so do not mind them; advise them, and speak to their persons with a clear saying.
We do not send a messenger except to be obeyed by God's leave. Had they come to you when they had wronged themselves and sought God's forgiveness, and the messenger sought forgiveness for them, they would have then found God to be Pardoning, Compassionate.*
No, by your Lord, they will not acknowledge until they make you judge in what they dispute with each other, then they will not find in their persons any animosity for what you have decided, and they will yield completely.*
Had We decreed for them, "Face yourselves," or "Leave your land," they would not have done so except for a few of them. If they had done what they were advised with, it would have been better for them and helped to strengthen them.*
Then We would have given them from Us a great reward.
We would have guided them to a Straight Path.
Whoever obeys God and the messenger will be among those whom God has blessed from the prophets and the truthful and the martyrs and the reformed. What an excellent companionship!*
That is the bounty from God; and God suffices as a Knower.
O you who acknowledge, take your precaution by going out in clusters, or going out all together.
From among you will be those that would lag behind, so that if disaster afflicts you he would say, "God has blessed me that I was not a martyr with them!"
If favor from God benefits you, he will speak as if there had been affection between you and him, "Oh, I wish I had been with them so I would win a great prize."
Let those who seek to purchase the Hereafter rather than this world fight in the cause of God. Whoever fights in the cause of God and is killed or attains victory, then We will grant him a great reward.*
Why do you not fight in the cause of God, when the oppressed amongst the men and women and children say, "Our Lord, bring us out of this town whose people are wicked, and grant us from Yourself a Supporter, and grant us from Yourself a Victor!"
Those who acknowledge, fight in the cause of God, while those who reject, fight in the cause of aggression; so fight the supporters of the devil, for the planning of the devil is weak.
Did you not see those who were told, "Restrain yourselves, and observe the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment." But when fighting was decreed for them, a group of them feared the people as much as they feared God or even more so. They said, "Our Lord, why did You decree fighting for us? If only You would delay for us till another time." Say, "The enjoyment of this world is little, and the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware; you will not be wronged in the least."
Wherever you may be, death will find you, even if you are in fortified towers. If any good befalls them, they say, "This is from God," and if any bad befalls them, they say, "This is from you!" Say, "All is from God;" what is wrong with these people, they barely understand anything said!
Any good that befalls you is from God, and any bad that befalls you is from yourself. We have sent you as a messenger to the people and God is enough as a witness.*
Whoever obeys the messenger has obeyed God; and whoever turns away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them.
They say, "Obedience," but when they emerge from you a group of them prepares for other that what you have said, and God records what they planned. So turn away from them and put your trust in God. God is enough for your trust.
Do they not reflect on the Quran? If it were from any other than God they would have found many contradictions in it.*
If any matter regarding security, or fear, comes to them they make it publicly known, but if they had referred it to the messenger and to those entrusted from them then it would have been known by those who studied it from them. Had it not been for God's grace upon you and His mercy, you would have followed the devil, except for a few.
So fight in the cause of God. You are not responsible except for yourself. Enjoin those who acknowledge, "Perhaps God will put a stop to the might of those who are ingrates." God is far Mightier and far more Punishing.
Whoever intercedes with a good intercession, he will have a reward of it; and whoever intercedes with an evil intercession, he will receive a share of it. God has control over all things.
If you are greeted with a greeting, then return an even better greeting or return the same. God is Reckoning over all things.
God, there is no god but He. He will gather you for the day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Who is more truthful in saying than God?
What is the matter with you that you are divided into two groups over the hypocrites, while God has allowed them to regress for what they have earned? Do you want to guide those whom God misguides? Whoever God causes to be misguided, you will never find for him a way.
They hope that you would reject as they rejected, then you would be the same. Do not take any of them as allies until they emigrate in the cause of God. If they turn away, then take them and kill them where you find them; and do not take from them any ally or supporter;*
Except for those who join a people between whom you have a covenant, or those who come to you with reluctance in their chests to fight you or to fight their own people. Had God willed He would have given them strength and they would have fought you. But if they retire from you, and did not fight you, and they offer you peace; then God does not make for you a way against them.
You will find others who want to be safe amongst you and safe amongst their own people. Every time they are returned to the test, they fall back in it. If they do not withdraw from you, offer you peace, and restrain their hands, then you shall take them and kill them where you find them. For these We have given you a clear authority.
Those who acknowledge cannot kill another who has also acknowledged except by accident. Whoever kills one who acknowledged by accident, then he shall set free an acknowledging slave, and give compensation to the family; except if they remit it. If he was from a people who are enemies to you, and he had acknowledged, then you shall set free an acknowledging slave. If he was from a people between whom you had a covenant, then compensation to his family, and set free an acknowledging slave. Whoever does not find, then the fasting of two months sequentially as repentance from God; God is Knowledgeable, Wise.*
Whoever kills one who acknowledged intentionally, then his reward shall be hell, eternally abiding therein; God will be angry with him, curse him, and for him is prepared a great retribution.
O you who acknowledge, if you mobilize in the cause of God then make a clear declaration, and do not say to those who greet you with peace, "You are not a acknowledger!" You are seeking the vanity of this world; but with God are many riches. That is how you were before, but God favored you, so make a clear declaration. God is Ever-aware of what you do.
Except the disabled, not equal are those who stayed behind from those who acknowledge with those who strived in the cause of God with their money and lives. God has preferred those who strive with their money and lives over those who stayed behind by a grade; and to both God has promised goodness; and God has preferred the strivers to those who stay by a great reward.*
Grades from Him, forgiveness, and a mercy. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Those whom the angels take, while they had wronged themselves; were asked, "What situation were you in?" They responded, "We were oppressed on earth." They asked, "Was God's earth not wide enough that you could emigrate in it?" To these their abode will be hell; what a miserable destiny;
Except for those men, women, and children who were oppressed and could not devise a plan nor could be guided to a way.
For these, perhaps God will pardon them. God is Pardoner, Forgiving.
Whoever emigrates in the cause of God will find in the land many spoils and a bounty. Whoever leaves his home emigrating to God and His messenger, then is overcome by death; his reward has fallen to God, and God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
If you are mobilized in the land, then there is no harm that you shorten the contact prayer, if you fear that the ingrates will try you. The ingrates are to you a clear enemy.*
If you are with them and hold the contact prayer for them, then let a group from amongst them stand with you and let them bring their weapons; when they have prostrated then let them stand guard from behind; let a group who has not yet contacted come and contact with you, and let them be wary and let them bring their weapons with them. The ingrates hope that you would neglect your weapons and goods so they can come upon you in one blow. There is no sin upon you if you are impeded by rainfall, or if you are ill, that you keep from placing down your weapons. Be wary. God has prepared for the ingrates a humiliating retribution.
So when you are done with the contact prayer, then remember God while standing, or sitting, or on your sides. When you are relieved, you shall hold the contact prayer; the contact prayer for those who acknowledge is a scheduled book.*
Do not falter in the pursuit of the remaining group. If you are feeling pain, then they are also feeling pain as you are; and you seek from God what they do not seek. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
We have revealed to you the book with truth that you may judge between the people according to what God has shown you, and do not be an advocate for the treacherous.
Seek forgiveness from God; God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves. God does not like those who are betrayers, sinners.
They may conceal this from the people, but they do not conceal it from God, and He was with them when they schemed what He does not approve of to be said. God is Encompassing over what they do.
Here you are arguing on their behalf in this world, but who will argue on their behalf with God on the day of Resurrection? Or who will be their sponsor?
Whoever does any evil, or wrongs himself, then seeks God's forgiveness; he will find God Forgiving, Compassionate.
Whoever earns any sin, it is he who has brought it on himself. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Whoever does a mistake or wrongdoing, then blames it on an innocent person; he has incurred falsehood and a clear sin.
Had it not been for God's favor upon you and His mercy, when a group of them were insistent on misguiding you; they would not have misguided except themselves, nor would they harm you in anything. God has sent down to you the book and the wisdom, and He has taught you what you did not know. God's grace upon you is great.
There is no good in most of their confidential talk, except whoever orders a charity or kindness or reconciliation between the people. Whoever does this seeking God's favor, We will give him a great reward.
Whoever is hostile to the messenger after the guidance has been made clear to him, and he follows other than the path of those who acknowledge; We will grant him what he has sought and deliver him to hell; what a miserable destination.
God does not forgive to have partners set up with Him, but He forgives other than that for whom He pleases. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed strayed a far straying.*
They are only calling on females beside God. Indeed, they are only calling on a persistent devil.
God has cursed him; and he had said, "I will take from Your servants a sizeable portion."*
"I will misguide them and make them desire, and I will command them, so that they will mark the ears of the livestock, and I will command them so they will make change to God's creation." Whoever takes the devil as a supporter other than God, then he has indeed lost a great loss.*
He promises them and makes them desire, but what the devil promises them is only vanity.
For these, their abode shall be hell; they will find no escape from it.
As for those who acknowledge and do good work, We will admit them into gardens with rivers flowing beneath, eternally they will abide therein. God's promise is truth; and who is more truthful in saying than God?
It will be neither by what you desire, nor by what the people of the book desire. Whoever works evil, he will be paid by it; and he will not find for himself besides God any supporter or victor.
Whoever works good whether male or female, and is an acknowledger, then these will be admitted to paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least.
Who is better in the system than one who peacefully surrenders himself to God, and is a good doer, and he followed the creed of Abraham in monotheism? God took Abraham as a friend.*
To God is what is in the heavens and in the earth; God is Encompassing over all things.
They ask you for divine instruction concerning women. Say, "God instructs you regarding them, as has been recited for you in the book about the rights of orphans whose mothers you want to marry without giving them their legal rights. You shall observe the rights of powerless children, and your duty to treat orphans with equity. Whatever good you do, God has full knowledge of it.*
If a woman fears from her husband disloyalty, or estrangement, then there is no sin for them to reconcile between themselves; and reconciliation is good. The persons are brought by need. If you are kind and aware, then God is Expert over what you do.
You will not be able to be fair regarding the women even if you make every effort; so do not sway too greatly and leave her as one hanging in a void. If you reconcile and be aware, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
If they separate, then God will provide for each of them from His bounty. God is Vast, Wise.
To God is what is in the heavens and the earth; and We have recommended to those who were given the book before you, and you, to be aware of God. If you reject, then to God is all that is in the heavens and in earth; God is Rich, Praiseworthy.
To God is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth; and God is enough as a Caretaker.
O you people, if He wills, He could make all of you cease to exist; then He would bring others in your place. God is most able to do this.
Whoever seeks the reward of this world: with God is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. God is Hearing, Watchful.
O you who acknowledge, stand with justice as witnesses to God, even if against yourselves, or the parents or the relatives, rich or poor, God is more worthy of them, so do not follow your desires from being just. If you twist or turn away, then God is Ever-aware of what you do.
O you who acknowledge; acknowledge God and His messenger, and the books which was sent down to His messenger, and the books that were sent before. Whoever rejects God, and His angels, and His book, and His messengers, and the Last day; then he has strayed a far straying.
Those who acknowledge, then reject, then acknowledge, then reject, then they increase in rejection; God was neither to forgive them nor to guide them to the path.
Give news to the hypocrites that they will have a painful retribution.
They are the ones who ally themselves with the ingrates besides of those who acknowledge. "Do they seek glory with them?" All glory belongs to God.
It has been sent down to you in the book, that when you hear God's signs being rejected and ridiculed in, then do not sit with them until they move on to a different subject; if not, then you are like them. God will gather the hypocrites and the ingrates in hell all together.*
They linger and observe you. If you have a victory from God they say, "Were we not with you?" If the ingrates have success, they say, "Did we not side with you and deter those who acknowledge from you?" God will judge between you on the day of Resurrection, and God will not grant the ingrates any success over those who acknowledge.
The hypocrites seek to deceive God, while He is deceiving them; and if they attend to the contact prayer, they do so lazily, only to show the people; they do not remember God except very little.
They are swaying in-between, belonging neither to this group nor to that group. Whomever God will misguide, you will not find for him a way.
O you who acknowledge, do not take the ingrates as allies instead of those who acknowledge. Do you want God to have a reason against you?
The hypocrites will be in the lowest level of the fire; and you will not find for them a victor;
As for those who repent, amend, hold fast to God, and devote their system to God; these will be with those who acknowledge. God will grant those who acknowledge a great reward.
What would God want with your punishment if you only appreciated and acknowledged? God is Appreciative, Knowledgeable.
God does not like that any negative sayings be publicized, except if one is wronged. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
If you reveal what is good or hide it, or forgive what is bad, then God is Pardoner, Omnipotent.
Those who rejected God and His messengers, and they want to make a distinction between God and His messengers, and they say, "We acknowledge some and reject some!", and they desire to take a path in-between.*
These are the true ingrates; and We have prepared for the ingrates a humiliating retribution.
Those who acknowledge God and His messengers and do not make a distinction between any of them, We will give them their rewards. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
The people of the book ask you to bring down to them a book from the heavens. They had asked Moses for even more than that, for they said, "Let us see God plainly!", so the lightning bolt took them for their wickedness. Then they took the calf after the proof had come to them, and We pardoned them for this; We gave Moses a clear authority.*
We raised the mount to be above because of the covenant they took, and We said to them, "Enter the passage by prostrating." We also said to them, "Do not transgress the Sabbath;" and We took from them a solemn covenant.
So, for the breaking of their covenant, and their rejection of God's signs, and their killing of the prophets without justice, and their saying, "Our hearts are layered over." Indeed, God has stamped upon their hearts because of their rejection; they do not acknowledge, except for a few.
For their rejection and them saying about Mary a great falsehood,
For their saying, "We have killed the Messiah Jesus the son of Mary, the messenger of God!" They did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but it appeared to them as if they had. Those who dispute are in doubt of him, they have no knowledge except to follow conjecture; they did not kill him for a certainty.*
Instead, God raised him to Himself; and God is Noble, Wise.
Among the people of the book are few who would have acknowledged him before his death, and on the day of Resurrection he will be witness against them.*
Because of the wickedness from those who are Jews, We made forbidden to them the good things that were lawful to them, and for their deterring many from the path of God.
For practicing usury/interest when they were told not to, and for consuming peoples money unjustly. We have prepared for the ingrates amongst them a painful retribution;*
But those of them who are firm in knowledge, as well as those who acknowledge, they acknowledge what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you; and those who observe the contact prayer, and those who contribute towards betterment, and those who acknowledge God and the Last day; to these We will give them their reward greatly.
We have inspired you as We have inspired Noah and the prophets after him. We inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon; and We have given David the Psalms.
Messengers of whom We have narrated to you from before, and messengers We have not narrated to you; and God spoke to Moses directly.
Messengers who were bearers of good news and warners, so that there will be no excuse for the people with God after the messengers. God is Noble, Wise.
But God bears witness for what He has sent down to you with His knowledge, and the angels bear witness; and God is enough as a witness.*
Those who have rejected and turned away from the path of God, they have strayed a far straying.
Those who have rejected and did wrong, God was not to forgive them, nor guide them to a path;
Except to the path of hell, in it they will abide eternally. For God this is very easy.
O people, a messenger has come to you with truth from your Lord, so acknowledge; that is better for you. If you do not appreciate, then to God is what is in the heavens and the earth. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
O people of the book, do not overstep in your system, nor say about God except the truth. Jesus the son of Mary was no more than God's messenger and the fulfillment of His word to Mary, and an inspiration from Him. So acknowledge God and His messengers, and do not say, "Trinity." Cease, for it is better for you. God is only One god, be He glorified that He should have a son! To Him is all that is in the heavens and what is in the earth. God is enough as a caretaker.*
The Messiah would not be too proud to be a servant to God, nor would the angels who are close to Him. Whoever is too proud from His service, and is arrogant, then He will summon them all before Him.
As for those who acknowledge and do reform, He will give them their rewards and increase for them from His bounty. As for those who are too proud and arrogant, He will punish them a painful retribution, and they will not find besides God any supporter or victor.
O people, a proof has come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a guiding light.
As for those who acknowledge God and hold fast to Him, He will admit them into a mercy from Him and a bounty, and He will guide them to Himself, a Straight Path.
They seek a ruling from you, say, "God gives you the ruling for those who have no descendants. If a person passes away and has no children but has a sister, then she shall receive half of what he leaves behind. He will inherit her fully if she has no child. However, if he has two sisters, then they will receive two thirds of what he left behind; and if he has siblings, male and female, then the male shall receive twice what the female receives." God makes clear to you that you do not stray; God is aware of all things.
O you who acknowledge, honor your contracts. Made lawful for you are all the animals of the livestock, except what is being recited to you, and what you are not allowed to hunt of the game while you are under restriction. God decrees as He pleases.
O you who acknowledge, do not violate God's decrees, nor the restricted month, nor the donations, nor what is regulated, nor maintainers of the Restricted Sanctuary who are seeking a bounty from their Lord and a blessing. When it is permitted for you, then you may hunt. Let not the hatred of another people, because they had barred you from the Restricted Temple, tempt you to aggress. Bond together in piety and righteousness, and do not bind together in sin and animosity. Be aware of God, for God's retribution is severe.*
Forbidden to you is what is already dead, and the blood, the meat of pig, and animals sacrificed to other than God. The strangled, killed by a blow, fallen from height, gored, eaten by wild animals except what you managed to rescue, and those slaughtered on altars... Also what you divide through gambling. This is all vile. Today the ingrates have given up from your system, so do not revere them, but revere Me. Today I have perfected your system for you, completed My blessings upon you, and I have accepted peaceful surrenderas the system for you. So, whoever is forced by severe hunger and not seeking sin, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
They ask you what was made lawful to them, say, "All the good things have been made lawful for you, and what the trained dogs and birds catch; you teach them from what God teaches you." So eat from what they have captured for you and mention God's name upon it, and be aware of God. God is quick in reckoning.*
Today, the good things have been made lawful to you, the food of those who have been given the book is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them; and the acknowledging independent women, and the independent women from the people of the book before you, when you have given them their wages, protected, chaste, and not seeking to take lovers. Whoever rejects acknowledgement, then his work has fallen, and in the Hereafter he is of the losers.
O you who acknowledge, when you rise to attend the contact prayer, then wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to the ankles; and if you have had intercourse, then you shall bathe. If you are ill, or traveling, or you have excreted feces, or you have had sexual contact with the women, and you could not find water, then you shall do ablution from clean soil; you shall wipe your faces and your hands. God does not want to make any hardship over you, but He wants to cleanse you and to complete His blessings upon you that you may be appreciative.*
Recall God's blessings over you and His covenant that He has bound you with, for which you have said, "We hear and obey," and be aware of God; for God knows what is inside the chests.
O you who acknowledge, stand for God as witnesses for justice, and let not the hatred towards a people make you avoid being just. Be just, for it is closer to awareness, and be aware of God. God is Expert over what you do.
God has promised those who acknowledge and do right that they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
Those who reject and deny Our signs, they are the dwellers of hell.
O you who acknowledge, recall God's blessings upon you when a group desired to extend their hands against you, and He restrained their hands from you. So, revere God; and in God those who acknowledge should put their trust.
God took the covenant of the Children of Israel and sent from them twelve representatives, and God said, "I am with you if you hold the contact prayer, contribute towards betterment, acknowledge My messengers, support them, and give God a loan of righteousness; then I will cancel your sins and admit you into gardens with rivers flowing beneath." Whoever rejects after this from you, then he has strayed from the path.
But because of them breaking their covenant, We have cursed them, made their hearts become hardened. They take the words out of context; and they forgot much of what they were reminded of. You will still discover betrayal in them except for a few; so pardon them and overlook; God loves the good doers.
From those who have said, "We are Nazarenes," We have taken their covenant and they have forgotten much of what they were reminded of; so We planted between them animosity and hatred until the day of Resurrection; and God will inform them of what they had done.
People of the book, Our messenger has come to you to proclaim for you much of what you were hiding from the book, and to ignore over much. A light has come to you from God and a clarifying book.
God guides with it whoever follows His acceptance, to the ways of peace; and He brings them out of the darkness and into the light by His leave; and He guides them to a Straight Path.
Ingrates indeed are those who have said, "God is the Messiah the son of Mary." Say, "Who has any power against God if He had wanted to destroy the Messiah son of Mary, and his mother, and all who are on earth!" To God is the sovereignty of heavens and earth and all that is in-between; He creates what He pleases. God is capable of all things.
The Jews and the Nazarenes said, "We are God's children and His loved ones." Say, "Then why does He punish you for your sins?" No, you are merely humans from what He has created. He forgives whom He pleases, and He punishes whom He pleases. To God is the sovereignty of heavens, earth, and all that is in-between, and to Him is the destiny.
O people of the book, Our messenger has come to clarify for you after a period of absence of messengers; so that you cannot say, "No bearer of good news or warner has come to us;" for a bearer of good news and a warner has come to you; and God is capable of all things.
Moses said to his people, "My people, remember God's favor upon you that he made amongst you prophets, and made you sovereigns, and he gave you what He had not given any from the worlds."
"O my people, enter the holy land that God Has decreed for you, and do not turn your backs, or you will become losers."
They said, "O Moses, in it are a mighty people, and we will not enter it until they leave. So when they leave, then we will enter it."
Among those who were afraid, two men whom God had blessed, said, "Enter upon them through the gate; when you enter it then you will be the victors. You shall put your trust in God if you had acknowledged."
They said, "O Moses, we will never enter it as long as they are in it, so go you and your Lord and fight, we will stay right here!"
He said, "My Lord, I do not control except myself and my brother, so separate between us and between the wicked people."
He said, "Then it has become forbidden for them for forty years, and they will be lost in the land." Do not be sorrowful over the wicked people.*
Recite for them the news of Adam's two sons in truth. They had both made an offering, and it was accepted from one of them, and not accepted from the other. He said, "I will kill you!"; he said, "God only accepts from the righteous."*
"If you stretch your hand to kill me, I will not stretch my hand to kill you, for I fear God, the Lord of the worlds."
"I want you to have both my sin as well as your own sin, and you will then be among the dwellers of the fire. Such is the reward of the wicked."
So he found it in himself to kill his brother, and he killed him. He thus became one of the losers.
So God sent forth a raven to scratch the land and show him how to bury his brother's body. He said, "Woes on me, I failed to be like this raven and bury my brother's body!" So he became of those who regretted.*
It is because of this that We have decreed for the Children of Israel, "Anyone who kills a person who has not committed murder, or who has not committed mischief in the land; then it is as if he has killed all the people! Whoever spares a life, then it is as if he has given life to all the people." Our messengers had come to them with clarification, but many of them are, after this, still transgressing on the earth.
The recompense of those who fight God and His messenger and seek to corrupt the land, is that they will be killed or crucified or that their hands and feet be cut off on alternate sides or that they be banished from the land. That is a disgrace for them in this world. In the Hereafter, they will have a great retribution;*
Except for those who repent before you overpower them, then know that God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, be aware of God and seek a way to Him, and strive in His cause; that you may succeed.
Those who have rejected, if they had all that is on earth and the same again with it to ransom against the retribution of the day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them; and they will have a painful retribution.
They want to get out of the fire, but they can never leave it; and they will have a lasting retribution.
The male thief, and the female thief, you shall mark, cut, or cut-off their hands/means as a punishment for their crime, and to serve as a deterrent from God. God is Noble, Wise.*
Whoever repents after his wrongdoing and makes reparations, then God will accept his repentance. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Did you not know that God possesses the sovereignty of heavens and earth? He punishes whom He wills and He forgives whom He wills; and God is capable of all things.
O messenger, do not be saddened by those who compete with each other in rejection from among those who said, "We acknowledge" with their mouths while their hearts did not acknowledge. From among the Jews, there are those who listen to lies; they listen to people who never came to you; they distort the words from their context, and they say, "If you are given this, then take it; but if you are given anything different, then beware!" Whomever God wants to test, you will not possess anything for him against God. These are the ones whose hearts God did not want to cleanse; in this world, they will have humiliation, and in the Hereafter, they will have a great retribution.
They listen to lies, and consume money illicitly. If they come to you, then you may judge between them or turn away from them. If you turn away from them then they cannot harm you in the least; and if you judge then you should judge between them with justice. God loves those who are just.*
How can they make you their judge when they have the Torah, containing God's judgment; then they turn away after that. They do not acknowledge.
We have sent down the Torah, in it is guidance and a light; the prophets who have peacefully surrendered judged with it for those who are Jews, as well as the Rabbis, and the Priests, for what they were entrusted of God's book, and they were witness over it. So do not revere the people but revere Me; and do not purchase with My signs a cheap price. Whoever does not judge with what God has sent down, then these are the ingrates.*
We have decreed for them in it that a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and wounds to be similar; and whoever remits anything of it, then it will cancel sins for him. Whoever does not judge by what God has sent down, then these are the wicked.*
We followed their teaching with Jesus the son of Mary, authenticating what was present with him of the Torah. We gave him the Injeel, in it is guidance and light, and to authenticate what is present with him of the Torah, and a guidance and lesson for the righteous.
Let the people of the Injeel judge with what God has sent down in it. Whoever does not judge by what God has sent down, then these are the vile ones.
We have sent down to you the book with truth, authenticating what is present of the book and superseding it. So judge between them by what God has sent down, and do not follow their desires from what has come to you of the truth. For each of you We have made laws, a structure. Had God willed, He would have made you all one nation, but He tests you with what He has given you, so advance the good deeds. To God you will return all of you, and He will inform you regarding that in which you dispute.*
You should rule among them by what God has sent down, and do not follow their wishes, and beware lest they divert you away from some of what God has sent down to you. If they turn away, then know that God wants to inflict them with some of their sins. Indeed, many among the people are corrupt.
Is it the judgment of the days of ignorance that they seek? Who is better than God as a judge for a people that comprehend?
O you who acknowledge, do not take the Jews and the Nazarenes as allies, for they are allies to one another; and whoever takes them as such from amongst you is one of them. God does not guide the wicked people.*
You will see those who have a disease in their hearts hurrying to them, saying, "We fear that a disaster will befall us!" Perhaps God will bring a victory or a decree from Himself, then they will become regretful over what they had kept hidden within themselves.
Those who acknowledge said, "Were these the ones who swore oaths by God that they were with you?" Their works have collapsed, and they have become losers.
O you who acknowledge, whoever from among you turns away from His system, then God will bring a people whom He loves and they love Him; humble towards those who acknowledge, dignified towards the ingrates; they strive in the cause of God and do not fear the blame of those who blame. This is God's grace, He bestows it upon whom He wills; God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.
Your ally is God, His messenger and those who acknowledge, who hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, and they are kneeling.
Whoever allies God, His messenger and those who acknowledge; then the party of God is the ones who will be victorious.
O you who acknowledge, do not take as allies those who have taken your system as fun and games from among those who have been given the book before you and the ingrates. Be aware of God if you are those who acknowledge.
If you call to the contact prayer, they take it as fun and games. That is because they are a people who do not reason.
Say, "O people of the book, do you hate us simply because we acknowledge God and what was sent down to us and what was sent down before?" Alas, most of them are wicked.
Say, "Shall I inform you of worse than this as a punishment from God? Those whom God cursed and displeased with them, and He made from them apes, pigs and servants of the aggressor. Those have a worst place and are more astray from the right path."*
If they come to you, they say, "We acknowledge," while they had entered in with rejection and went out with the same. God is aware of what they were hiding.
You see many of them hasten to sin, animosity, and consuming money illicitly. Miserable indeed is what they were doing.
Shouldn't the Rabbis and Priests deter them from speaking evil and consuming money illicitly? Miserable indeed is what they had done.
The Jews said, "The hand of God is tied-down!" Their hands will be tied-down, and they will be cursed for what they have said. No, His hands are wide open, spending as He wills. For many of them, what has been sent down to you will increase them in aggression and rejection; and We have cast between them animosity and hatred until the day of Resurrection. Every time they ignite the fire of war, God puts it out; and they seek to make corruption in the land; and God does not like the corrupters.
If the people of the book only would have acknowledged and been aware, We would have cancelled for them their sins and admitted them to gardens of paradise.
If they had upheld the Torah, the Injeel, and what was sent down to them from their Lord, they would have been rewarded from above them and below their feet. From among them is a pious nation, but many of them commit evil.
O messenger, deliver what was sent down to you from your Lord; if you do not, then you have not delivered His message. God will protect you from the people. God does not guide the rejecting people.
Say, "O people of the book, you are not upon anything until you uphold the Torah and the Injeel and what was sent down to you from your Lord." For many of them, what was sent down to you from your Lord will only increase them in transgression and rejection. So do not feel sorry for the ingrates.
"Those who acknowledge, those who are Jewish, those who are the followers of other religions, and the Nazarenes Whoever acknowledges God and the Last day and does good works, then they will have nothing to fear nor will they grieve."*
We have taken the covenant of the Children of Israel and We sent to them Our messengers. Every time a messenger came to them with what their minds did not desire, a group of them they would reject, and a group of them they would kill.
They did not consider that it might be a test, so they turned blind and deaf. Then God accepted the repentance from them. But again many of them turned blind and deaf. God is watcher over what they do.
Ingrates indeed are those who have said, "God is the Messiah son of Mary!" Although the Messiah had said, "O Children of Israel, serve God, my Lord and your Lord. Whoever sets up partners with God, then God will forbid paradise for him, and his destiny will be the fire; and the wicked will have no supporters."*
Ingrates indeed are those who have said, "God is the third of trinity!" There is no god but One god. If they do not cease from what they are saying, then those who reject from among them will be afflicted with a painful retribution.
Would they not repent to God and seek His forgiveness? God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
The Messiah son of Mary, was no more than a messenger; like the messengers before him. His mother was trustworthy, and they used to eat the food. See how We clarify the signs for them, then see how they deviate.
Say, "Do you serve other than God what cannot harm you or benefit you?" God is the Hearer, the Knower.
Say, "O followers of the book, do not overstep in your system other than the truth, and do not follow the desires of a people who have been misguided before, and they misguide many; and they strayed from the right path."
Cursed are those who have rejected from among the Children of Israel by the tongue of David and Jesus son of Mary. That is for what they have disobeyed, and for what they transgressed.*
They would not stop each other from doing sin. Wickedness is what they used to do.
You see many of them allying the ingrates. Wicked is what they have provided for themselves, for God's wrath is upon them, and in the retribution they will abide.
If they had only acknowledged God and the prophet, and what was sent down to him, then they would not have taken them as allies; but many of them are corrupt.
You will find the people with greatest animosity towards those who acknowledge are the Jews and those who set up partners; and you will find the closest in affection to those who acknowledge are those who said, "We are Nazarenes;" that is because amongst them are Priests and Monks, and they are not arrogant.*
If they hear what was sent down to the messenger you see their eyes flooding with tears, for what they have known as the truth, they say, "Our Lord, we acknowledge, so record us with the witnesses."
"Why shouldn't we acknowledge God and what has come to us of the truth? We yearn that our Lord admits us with the righteous people."
So God rewarded them for what they have said with paradises that have rivers flowing beneath them, in them they shall abide; such is the reward of the good doers.
Those who rejected and denied Our signs, they are the dwellers of hell.
O you who acknowledge, do not forbid the good things that God has made lawful to you, and do not transgress; God does not like the transgressors.*
Eat from what God has provided for you, good and lawful; and be aware of God in whom you acknowledge.
God will not hold you for your unintentional oaths, but He will hold you for what oaths you have made binding with consideration. Its cancellation shall be the feeding of ten poor people from the average of what you feed your family, or that you clothe them, or that you free a slave; whoever cannot find shall fast for three days; as an atonement when you swear. You shall fulfill your oaths. It is such that God clarifies for you His signs that you may be thankful.*
O you who acknowledge, intoxicants, and gambling, and altars, and arrows of chance are tools of affliction used by the devil. You shall avoid him so that you may be successful.*
The devil only wants to cause strife between you through intoxicants and gambling, and to repel you away from remembering God and from the contact prayer. Will you then desist?
Obey God and obey the messenger, and beware. If you turn away then know that the duty of the messenger is clear deliverance.
There is no sin upon those who acknowledge and do good works for what they eat when they are aware, acknowledge, and do good work; then they are aware and acknowledge, then they are aware and do good; God loves the good doers.
O you who acknowledge, God will test you with some of the game for hunting, coming within reach of your hands and your spears, so that God will know who reveres Him when unseen. Whoever transgresses after this, then he will have a painful retribution.
O you who acknowledge, do not kill any game while you are restricted; and whosoever of you kills it deliberately, then the recompense is to value what was killed against the livestock, which shall be judged by two equitable persons from you, and to make such as a donation to reach the Quadrangle. Or, its expiation shall be in using it to feed the needy ones, or by an equivalent fast; to taste the consequence of his deed; God forgives what has past. Whosoever returns, then God will avenge it. God is Noble, Avenger.
Lawful for you is the catch of the sea, to eat it as enjoyment for you and for those who travel; and forbidden for you is the catch of the land as long as you are under restriction; and be aware of God to whom you will be summoned.
God has made the Quadrangle, the Restricted Sanctuary, a maintenance for the people, and also the restricted month, the donations, the regulations so that you know that God knows what is in heavens and what is in earth, and that God is aware of all things.*
Know that God is powerful in retribution, and that God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
The only duty of the messenger is to deliver. God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
Say, "The bad and the good are not equal, even if the abundance of the bad pleases you." So be aware of God, O you who have intelligence, that you may succeed.
O you who acknowledge, do not ask about things, which if revealed to you, would harm you. If you ask about them after the Quran has been sent down, then they will become clear to you. God pardons for them, and God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
A community before you had asked the same, then they became ingrates in it.*
God did not prohibit livestock for begetting five or seven, for oaths, for begetting twins, for fathering ten; but the people who rejected invented lies to God, and most of them do not reason.
If they are told, "Come to what God has sent down, and to the messenger;" they say, "We are content with what we found our fathers doing." What if their fathers did not know anything nor were they guided?
O you who acknowledge, you are responsible for yourselves. None of the misguided can harm you when you are guided. To God is your return, all of you, and then He will inform you of what you have done.
O you who acknowledge, witnessing a will when death is approaching to one of you shall be done by two who are just amongst you. Or, if you have ventured out in the land, then two others may suffice if death is approaching you; you will hold them after the contact prayer, and let them swear by God if you have doubt, "We will not sell it for any price, even if he was a near relative, and we will not conceal the testimony of God, or else we are then of the sinners."
In case it is noticed that they were biased, then two others belonging to the discriminated party shall take their place. They should swear by God, "Our testimony is more truthful than their testimony, and if we transgress, then we are of the wicked."
This is best so that they would bring the testimony on its face value, for fear that their oaths would be discarded after being made. Be aware of God, and listen; God does not guide the wicked people.
The day God will gather the messengers and He will say, "What was the response you received?"; they said, "We have no knowledge, you are the Knower of all the unseen."*
God said, "O Jesus son of Mary, recall My blessings upon you and your mother that I supported you with the Holy Spirit; you spoke to the people in the cradle and in old age; and I taught you the book and the wisdom, and the Torah, and the Injeel; and you would create from clay the shape of a bird, then blow into it and it becomes a bird by My leave; and you heal the blind and the leper by My leave; and you brought out the dead by My leave. I have restrained the Children of Israel from you, that you came to them with proofs; but those who rejected amongst them said, "This is an obvious magic!""
I inspired the disciples that you shall acknowledge Me and My messenger; they Said, 'We acknowledge, and bear witness that we have peacefully surrendered.'
When the disciples said, "O Jesus son of Mary, can your Lord send down for us a feast from heaven?" he said, "Be aware of God if you are those who acknowledge."
They said, "We want to eat from it and to reassure our hearts, and so we know that you are truthful, and so that we can become a witness over it."
Jesus son of Mary said, "Our Lord and god, send down to us a feast from heaven, that it becomes a joy to us from the first to the last, and a sign from You, and provide for us, you are the best provider."*
God said, "I will send it down to you, but whoever rejects after this from amongst you, I will punish him a punishment like no one else from the worlds will be punished!"
God will say, "O Jesus son of Mary, did you tell the people to take you and your mother as gods besides God?" He said, "Be you glorified, I cannot say what I have no right to. If I had said it then You know it, You know what is in my person while I do not know what is in Your person. You are the Knower of the unseen."
"I only said to them what You commanded me to say, that you shall serve God my Lord and your Lord; and I was witness over them as long as I was with them, but when You took me, You were watcher over them. You are witness over all things."
"If You punish them, then they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, then You are the Noble, Wise."
God will say, "This is a day when the truth will benefit the truthful." They will have gardens with rivers flowing beneath; eternally they will abide therein. God has become pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. Such is the greatest victory.
To God is the sovereignty of heavens, earth, and all that is in them; and He is capable of all things.
Praise be to God who created the heavens and the earth, and Who made darkness and light. Yet those who have been unappreciative of their Lord continue to deviate.
He is the One who created you from clay, then decreed a fixed time period for you; a time defined by Him. Yet you are still skeptical.
He is God in the heavens and the earth. He knows your secrets and what you reveal; and He knows what you earn.
Whenever a sign came to them from their Lord, they turned away from it.
They have denied the truth when it came to them. The news will ultimately come to them of what they were mocking.
Did they not see how many generations We have destroyed before them? We granted them dominance over the land more than what We granted you, We sent the clouds to them abundantly, and We made rivers flow beneath them; then We destroyed them for their sins, and established after them a new generation.
If We had sent down to you a book already written on paper, and they touched it with their own hands, then those who have rejected would say, "This is but clear magic!"
They said, "If only an angel were sent down to him?" But if We had sent down an angel, then the matter would be over, and they would not be reprieved.
If We had chosen an angel, We would have made him appear as a man, and We would have confused them in what they already are confused.
Messengers before you were ridiculed; but those who mocked them suffered the consequences of what they ridiculed.
Say, "Roam the earth, then see what the punishment of the ingrates was!"
Say, "To whom is all that is in heavens and earth?" Say, "To God." He has decreed mercy on Himself, that He will gather you to the day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Those who have lost themselves, they do not acknowledge.*
For Him is what resides in the night and in the day; and He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Say, "Shall I take other than God as an ally; the creator of heavens and earth; while He feeds and is not fed!" Say, "I have been commanded to be the first who peacefully surrenders." Do not be of those who set up partners.
Say, "I fear if I disobey my Lord, the retribution of a great day!"
Whoever He spares from it, then He had treated him with mercy; and that is the obvious success.
If God were to touch you with harm, then none can remove it except Him; and if He were to touch you with good, then He is capable of all things.
He is the Supreme over His servants; and He is the Wise, the Ever-aware.*
Say, "Which is the greatest testimony?" Say, "God is witness between me and you, and He has inspired to me this Quran that I may warn you with it and whomever it reaches. Do you bear witness that along with God are other gods?" Say, "I do not bear witness!" Say, "He is only One god, and I am innocent of your setting up partners!"*
Those to whom We have given the book know it as they know their children. Those who lost themselves, they do not acknowledge.
Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God, or denies His signs! The wicked will never succeed.
The day We gather them all, then We say to those who set up partners: "Where are your partners whom you used to claim?"*
Then, their only trial was to say, "By God, our Lord, we did not set up partners!"
See how they lied to themselves; and what they invented deserted them.
Among them are those who listen to you; and We have made covers over their hearts to prevent them from understanding it, and deafness in their ears; and if they see every sign they will not acknowledge; even when they come to you they argue, those who reject say, "This is nothing but the tales from the past!"*
They are deterring others from it, and keeping away themselves; but they will only destroy themselves, yet they do not notice.
If you could see when they are standing over the fire, they say, "If only we were sent back, we would not deny the signs of our Lord, and we would be those who acknowledge!"
No, it is merely what they have been concealing that has now become evident to them; and if they were sent back they would return to what they were deterred from doing, they are but liars!
They had also said, "There is only this worldly life, and we will not be resurrected!"
If you could see them when they are standing at their Lord? He said, "Is this not the truth?" They said, "Yes, by our Lord." He said, "Then taste the retribution for what you have rejected."
Losers are those who have denied their meeting with God; until the moment comes to them suddenly, then they say, "We deeply regret what we have wasted in it," and they will carry their burdens on their backs; miserable indeed is their burden.
This worldly life is nothing more than games and a diversion, and the abode of the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware. Do you not understand?
We know that you are saddened by what they say; they are not rejecting you, but it is God's signs which the wicked disregard.
Messengers before you were denied, but they were patient for what they were denied, and they were harmed until Our victory came to them; nothing changes the words of God. News of the messengers has come to you.
If their aversion has become too much for you, then perhaps you could make a tunnel in the earth, or a ladder to the heavens, and bring them a sign. Had God willed, He would have summoned them to the guidance; so do not be of the ignorant ones.
Only those who listen will respond. As for the dead, God will resurrect them, then to Him they will return.
They said, "If only a sign was sent to him from his Lord!" Say, "God is able to send a sign, but most of them would not know."
There is not a creature in the earth, or a bird that flies with its wings, but are nations like you. We did not leave anything out of the book; then to their Lord they will be summoned.*
Those who deny Our signs, they are deaf and dumb, in darkness. Whoever God wishes He misguides, and whoever He wishes He makes him on a straight path.
Say, "We will see when God's retribution comes to you, or the moment comes to you, if you will still call on any other than God. If you are being truthful."
"No, it is Him alone you will call on; then He will remove what you called Him for, if He wills; you will forget what you set up."
We have sent others to nations before you. We then took them with adversity and hardship, perhaps they would implore.
If only they had implored when Our punishment came to them; but their hearts hardened, and the devil adorned for them what they used to do.
So when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We opened for them the gates of all opportunities; and when they became haughty with what they were given, We took them suddenly! They were confounded.
It was thus that the remainder of the wicked people was wiped out; and praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds.
Say, "Do you see that if God were to take away your hearing and your eyesight, and He seals your hearts; which god besides God can bring it to you?" Look how We cite the signs, but then they turn away.
Say, "Do you see if God's retribution comes to you suddenly, or gradually, will anyone be destroyed except the wicked people?"
We do not send the messengers except as bearers of good news and warners; whoever acknowledges, and reforms, then there is no fear for them nor will they grieve.
Those who deny Our signs, the retribution will touch them for their wickedness.
Say, "I do not say to you that I posses God's treasures, nor do I know the future, nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I merely follow what is inspired to me." Say, "Are the blind and the seer the same? Do you not think?"
Warn with it those who realize that they will be summoned to their Lord; they do not have besides Him any protector nor intercessor; so that they may be righteous.*
Do not turn away those who call on their Lord at dawn and dusk seeking His presence; you are not responsible for their account, nor are they responsible for your account; if you turn them away, then you will be of the wicked.
Thus, We test them with one another, so that they may say, "Are these the ones whom God has blessed from amongst us?" Is God not aware of the thankful?
If those who acknowledge Our signs come to you, then say, "Peace be upon you, our Lord has decreed mercy upon Himself, that any of you who commits sin out of ignorance and then repents afterwards and reforms, then He is Forgiving, Compassionate."
It is such that We explain the signs, and make clear the way of the criminals.
Say, "I am warned to stop serving those you call upon other than God." Say, "I will not follow your desires; otherwise I would go astray and I would not be of those guided."*
Say, "I am on a proof from my Lord and you have denied it. I do not have what you hasten towards; the judgment is with God only; He carves out the truth, and He is the best analyzer."*
Say, "If I had what you are hastening for, then the matter between us would have been resolved. God is fully aware of the wicked."
With Him are the keys to the unseen, none knows them except He. He knows what is in the land and in the sea; and not a leaf falls except with His knowledge; nor a seed in the darkness of the earth; nor anything moist or anything dry; all is in a clear book.*
He is the One who takes you at night, and He knows what you have done during the day, then He sends you back to it until a fixed span; then to Him is your return and He will inform you of what you used to do.*
He is the Supreme over His servants, and He sends over you guardians. So that when the time of death comes to one of you, Our messengers take him, and they do not neglect any.*
Then they are returned to God, their true Patron; to Him is the judgment and He is the swiftest in reckoning.
Say, "Who rescues you from the darkness of the land and the sea?," you call on Him openly and secretly: "If You save us from this, we will be of the thankful!"
Say, "God will save you from it and from all distresses, yet you still set up partners!"
Say, "He is able to send retribution from above you or from below your feet, or He will make you belong to opposing factions, then He will let you taste the might of each other." See how We cite the signs, perhaps they may comprehend.
Your people denied it, while it is the truth. Say, "I am not a guardian over you!
For every news there is a time, and you will come to know."
If you encounter those who make fun of Our signs, then turn away from them until they move on to a different topic; and if the devil lets you forget, then do not sit after remembering with the wicked people.*
Those who are aware are not held accountable for them, but a reminder may help them to be aware.
Leave alone those who have taken their system as a game and diversion, and this worldly life has tempted them. Remind with it that a person will suffer for what s/he has earned, s/he will not have besides God any supporter nor intercessor; and even if s/he offers every ransom, none will be accepted from it. These are the ones who have suffered with what they have earned; for them will be a boiling drink, and a painful retribution for what they had rejected.
Say, "Shall we call upon other than God what cannot benefit us or harm us, and we turn back on our heels after God has guided us?" This is like the one whom the devils have managed to mislead on earth, he is confused, having friends who call him to the guidance: "Come to us!" Say, "The guidance is God's guidance, and we have been ordered to peacefully surrender to the Lord of the worlds."
Hold the contact prayer, and be aware; and to Him you will be summoned.
He is the One who created the heavens and the earth with truth, and the day He says: "Be," then it is! His saying is truth; and to Him is the sovereignty, the day the trumpet is blown. Knower of the unseen and the seen; He is the Wise, the Ever-aware.
Abraham said to his father, Azar: "Will you take idols as gods? I see you and your people clearly misguided."*
Thus We showed Abraham the kingdom of heavens and earth, so that he will be of those who have certainty.
When the night covered him, he saw a planet, and he said, "This is my Lord." But when it disappeared he said, "I do not like those that disappear."
So when he saw the moon rising, he said, "This is my Lord." But when it disappeared he said, "If my Lord will not guide me, then I will be amongst the wicked people!"
So when he saw the sun rising, he said, "This is my Lord, this is bigger." But when it disappeared he said, "My people, I am innocent of what you have set up."
"I shall turn my face to the One who created the heavens and the earth, as a monotheist, and I am not of those who set up partners."*
His people argued with him. He said, "Do you argue with me regarding God, when He has guided me? I do not fear what you have set up except if my Lord wishes it so; my Lord encompasses all things with knowledge; will you not remember?"
"How can I possibly fear what you have set up; yet you do not fear that you have set up partners with God, for which He has not sent down to you any authority! So which of our two groups is more worthy of security if you know?"
Those who acknowledge and do not dress their acknowledgement with inequity; they will have security, and they are guided.*
Such was Our argument that We gave Abraham over his people; We raise the degree of whom We please. Your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable.*
We granted him Isaac and Jacob, both of whom We guided; and Noah We guided from before; and from his progeny is David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. It is such that We reward the good doers.
And Zachariah and John, and Jesus, and Elias; all were of the reformed.
Also Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot; each We have distinguished over the worlds.
From their fathers and their progeny and their brothers We have also chosen; and We guided them to a straight path.
Such is the guidance of God, He guides with it whom He pleases of His servants. If they set up partners, then all that they had worked would fall away from them.*
Those to whom We have given the book, the law, and the prophethood, if they reject it, then We will entrust it to a people who will not reject it.
These are the ones guided by God; so let their guidance be an example. Say, "I do not ask you for a wage; this is but a reminder for the worlds."
They did not value God as He deserves to be valued, for they said, "God has never sent down anything to any human being." Say, "Who then has sent down the book which Moses had come with, a light and guidance for the people? You treat it just as scrolls of paper; you show some of it and conceal much, though you were taught what neither you nor your fathers knew." Say, "God has." Then leave them playing in their folly.
This too is a book which We have sent down, blessed, authenticating what is before it, that you may warn the capital city and those around it. Those who acknowledge the Hereafter, will acknowledge this, and they are dedicated to their contact prayer.
Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God, or says: "It has been inspired to me," when no such thing inspired to him; or who says: "I will bring down the same as what God has sent down." If you could only see the wicked at the moments of death when the angels have their arms opened: "Bring yourselves out, today you will be given the disgraceful punishment for what you used to say about God without truth, and you used to be arrogant towards His signs."
"You have come to Us individually, just as We had created you the first time; and you have left behind you all that We have provided for you. We do not see your intercessors with you that you used to claim were with you in partnership; all is severed between you, and what you have claimed has abandoned you."*
God is the splitter of the seeds and the grains; He brings the living out from the dead and He is the bringer of the dead out from the living. Such is God; so why are you deluded?
Initiator of morning. He made the night to reside in, and the sun and the moon as a calculation device. Such is the measure of the Noble, the Knowledgeable.
He is the One who made for you the stars, to guide you by them in the darkness of the land and the sea. We have explained the signs to a people who know.
He is the One who initiated you from one person; a repository and a sojourn. We have explained the signs to a people who comprehend.
He is the One who sent down water from the sky, and We brought out with it plants of every kind. We brought out from it the green, from which We bring out multiple seeds; and what is from the palm trees, from its sheaths hanging low and near; and gardens of grapes, olives and pomegranates, similar and not similar. Look at its fruit when it blossoms and its ripeness. In this are signs for a people that acknowledge.
Yet, they made partners with God from among the Jinn, while He had created them. They invented for Him sons and daughters without having any knowledge! Be He glorified and far above what they describe.
Originator of the heavens and the earth, how can He have a son when He did not take a wife? He created all things and He is knowledgeable over all things.
Such is God, your Lord, there is no god but He; creator of all things, so serve Him. He is caretaker over all things.
The eyesight cannot reach Him, yet He can reach all eyesight; and He is the Subtle, the Ever-aware.
"Visible proofs have come to you from your Lord; so whoever can see, does so for himself, and whoever is blinded, does the same. I am not a guardian over you."
It is thus that We cite the signs and that they may say, "You have studied," and We will make it clear for a people who know.
Follow what is inspired to you from your Lord; there is no god but He, and turn away from those who have set up partners.
If God had willed, they would not have set up partners. We did not place you over them as a guardian, nor are you their lawyer.
Do not insult those who call on other than God, lest they insult God without knowledge. We have similarly adorned for every nation their works; then to their Lord is their return and He will inform them of what they had done.
They swore by God using their strongest oaths; that if a sign came to them they would acknowledge it. Say, "The signs are from God; and how do you know that once it comes, that they would not reject?"
We divert their hearts and eyesight, as they did not acknowledge it the first time; and We leave them wandering in their transgression.*
If We had sent down to them the angels, and the dead spoke to them, and We had gathered before them everything, they still would not acknowledge except if God wills. But most of them are ignorant.
We have permitted the enemies of every prophet, human and Jinn devils, to inspire in each other fancy words in order to deceive. Had your Lord willed, they would not have done it. You shall disregard them and their fabrications.*
That is so the hearts of those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter will listen to it, and they will accept it, and they will take of it what they will.
"Shall I seek other than God as a judge when He has sent down to you this book sufficiently detailed?" Those to whom We have given the book know it is sent down from your Lord with truth; so do not be of those who have doubt.*
The word of your Lord has been completed with truth and justice; there is no changing His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
If you obey the majority of those on earth they will lead you away from God's path; that is because they follow conjecture, and that is because they only guess.*
Your Lord is fully aware of who strays from His path, and He is fully aware of the guided ones.
So eat from that on which God's name has been mentioned, if you indeed acknowledge His signs.*
Why should you not eat that on which God's name has been mentioned, when He has sufficiently detailed to you what has been made forbidden; except what you are forced to? Many misguide by their desires without knowledge; your Lord is fully aware of the transgressors.*
Leave what is openly a sin as well as what is discreet; those who earn sin will be punished for what they have taken.
Do not eat from what God's name has not been mentioned, for it is vile. The devils inspire their supporters to argue with you; and if you obey them, then you have set up partners.*
Is one who was dead and to whom We gave life, and We made for him a light to walk with amongst the people, as one whose example is in darkness and he will not exit from it? It is such that the work of the ingrates has been adorned for them.
As such, We have permitted in every town the influential from its criminals, to scheme in it. They only scheme their own selves without perceiving.
If a sign comes to them they say, "We will not acknowledge until we are given the same as what God's messengers were given!" God is fully aware of where He makes His message; those criminals will have debasement with God and a painful retribution for what they had schemed.*
Whomever God wishes to guide, He will open his chest towards peacefully surrender; and whomever He wishes to misguide, He will make his chest tight and constricted, as one who is climbing towards the sky. It is such that God afflicts those who do not acknowledge.
This is your Lord's straight path. We have sufficiently detailed the signs to a people who take heed.
They will have the abode of peace with their Lord; He is their supporter because of what they used to do.
 The day He summons them all: "O tribes of Jinn, you have managed to take many humans." Their supporters from the humans said, "Our Lord, we have indeed enjoyed one another, and we have reached our destiny to which You delayed us." He said, "The fire is your dwelling, in it you shall abide eternally, except as your Lord wishes." Your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable.
It is such that We make the wicked as supporters to one another for what they had earned.
"O you tribes of Jinn and humans, did not messengers come to you from amongst you and relate to you My signs, and warn you of the meeting of this day?" They said, "Yes, we bear witness upon ourselves;" and the worldly life deceived them, and they bore witness on themselves that they were ingrates.
That is because your Lord was not to destroy any town because of its wickedness while its people were unaware.
But there are degrees for what they had done; and your Lord is never unaware of what they do.
Your Lord is Rich, full of Compassion. If He wished, He could remove you and bring after you whom He pleases, just like He established you from the seed of another people.
What you have been promised will come, you cannot escape it.
Say, "My people, do your best, and so will I. You will then know those who deserve the ultimate abode. The wicked will not succeed."
Of crops and the livestock He provided, they set aside a portion for God, they said, "This is for God," according to their claim, "This is for our partners." However, what was for their partners did not reach God, while what was for God reached their partners! Miserable is how they judged.*
Thus, for those who set up partners their partners adorned the killing of born children, in order to turn them and to confuse their system for them. Had God willed they would not have done this, so ignore them and what they invent.*
They said by asserting that: "These are livestock and crops that are restricted, and none shall eat from them except as we please." Even, livestock whose backs are forbidden, and livestock over which they do not mention God's name as invention against Him. He will recompense them for what they invented.
They said, "What is in the bellies of these livestock is purely for our males and forbidden for our spouses, and if it comes out dead, then they will be partners in it." God will recompense them for what they describe. He is Wise, Knowledgeable.
Losers are those who have killed their born children foolishly, without knowledge, and they forbade what God had provided for them by attributing lies to God. They have strayed and they were not guided.
He is the One Who initiated gardens; both trellised and untrellised; palm trees, and plants, all with different tastes; and olives and pomegranates, similar and not similar. Eat from its fruit when it blossoms and give its due on the day of harvest; and do not waste. He does not like the wasteful.*
From the livestock are those for burden, and also for clothing. Eat from what God has provided you and do not follow the footsteps of the devil; he is to you a clear enemy.
Eight pairs: from the sheep two, and from the goats two; say, "Is it the two males that He forbade or the two females, or what the womb of the two females bore? Inform me if you are truthful!"*
From the camels two, and from the cattle two; say, "Is it the two males that He forbade or the two females, or what the womb of the two females bore? Or were you witnesses when God ordered you with this?" Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God to misguide the people without knowledge? God does not guide the wicked people.*
Say, "I do not find in what is inspired to me forbidden except that it be already dead, or blood poured forth, or the meat of pig, for it is foul; or what is corruptly dedicated to other than God." Whoever is forced without seeking disobedience or transgression, then your Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
For those who are Jewish, We forbade all that have claws; and from the cattle and the sheep We forbade their fat except what is attached to the back, or entrails, or mixed with bone. That is a punishment for their rebellion, and We are truthful.
If they deny you, then say, "Your Lord has vast Compassion, but His Might will not be turned away from the criminal people."
Those who set up partners will say, "If God wished, we would not have set up partners, nor would have our fathers, nor would we have forbidden anything." Those before them lied in the same way, until they tasted Our might. Say, "Do you have any knowledge to bring out to us? You only follow conjecture, you only guess."*
Say, "God has the conclusive argument. If He wished He would have guided you all."*
Say, "Bring forth your witnesses who bear witness that God has forbidden this." If they bear witness, then do not bear witness with them, nor follow the desires of those who deny Our signs, and those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter; and they make equals with their Lord!*
Say, "Come let me recite to you what your Lord has forbidden for you: that you should not set up anything with Him; and be kind to your parents; and do not kill your born children for fear of poverty, We provide for you and for them; and do not come near lewdness, what is plain of it or subtle; and do not kill the person which God has forbidden, except in justice. That is what He enjoined you that you may comprehend."
"Do not come near the money of the orphan, except for what is best, until he reached his maturity; and give honestly full measure and weight equitably. We do not burden a person beyond its capacity. When you speak you must observe justice, even if against a relative. You shall also observe the pledges you made to God. He has enjoined you this so that you may take heed."
This is My path, a Straight One. "So follow it, and do not follow the other paths lest they divert you from His path. That is what He has enjoined you so that you may be aware."
Then We gave Moses the book, complete with the best and sufficiently detailing all things, and a guide and mercy that they may acknowledge the meeting of their Lord.
This too is a blessed book that We have sent down. So follow it and be aware, that you may receive mercy.
Lest you say, "The book was only sent down to two groups before us, and we were unaware of their study!"
Or you say, "If the book was sent to us we would have been more guided than they!" Proof has come to you from your Lord, guidance and a mercy. Who is more wicked than one who denies God's signs and turns away from them? We will punish those who turn away from Our signs with the pain of retribution for what they turned away.
Do they wait until the angels will come to them, or your Lord comes, or some signs from your Lord? The day some signs come from your Lord, it will do no good for any person to acknowledge if s/he did not acknowledge before, or s/he gained good through his/her acknowledgement. Say, "Wait, for we too are waiting."
Those who have divided their system and become sects, you have nothing to do with them. Their matter will be with God, then, He will inform them of what they had done.*
Whoever comes with a good deed, he will receive ten times its worth, and whoever comes with a sin, he will only be recompensed its like; they will not be wronged.
Say, "My Lord has guided me to a Straight Path. An upright system, the creed of Abraham the monotheist; he was not from those who set up partners."
Say, "My contact prayer, my devotion and offerings, my life, and my death, are all to God the Lord of the worlds."
"He has no partner, and this is what I was commanded; I am the first of those who have peacefully surrendered."
Say, "Shall I seek other than God as a Lord when He is the Lord of everything?" Every person earns what is for it, and none will bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return and He will inform you regarding your disputes.*
He is the One who made you successors on earth, and He raised some of you over others in grades, to test you with what He had given you. Your Lord is quick to punishment, and He is Forgiving, Compassionate.
A1L30M40S90*
A book that has been sent down to you, so let there not be any burden in your chest from it, that you may warn with it; and a reminder to those who acknowledge.
Follow what was sent down to you all from your Lord, and do not follow besides Him any supporters. Little do you remember!
How many a town have We destroyed; for Our punishment came to them while sleeping, or while resting.
Then their only saying when Our punishment came to them was: "We were wicked!"
We will ask those who received the message, and We will ask the messengers.
We will narrate to them with knowledge; We were not absent.
The scales on that day will be the truth. Whoever has heavy scales, these are the successful ones.
Whoever has light scales, these are the ones who lost themselves for they wrongfully treated Our signs.*
We granted you dominion on earth, and made for you in it a habitat; little do you give thanks!
We created you, We shaped you, and then We said to the angels: "Submit to Adam;" so they submitted except for Satan, he was not of those who submitted.
He said, "What has prevented you from submitting when I have ordered you?" He said, "I am better than him, You created me from fire and created him from clay!"*
He said, "Descend from it, it is not for you to be arrogant here; depart, for you are disgraced."
He said, "Grant me respite until the day they are resurrected?"
He said, "You are granted respite."*
He said, "For You having me sent astray, I will stalk for them on Your Straight Path."*
"Then I will come to them from between their hands, and from behind them, and from their right, and from their left; You will not find most of them to be appreciative."
He said, "Get out from this, you are despised and banished. As for those among them who follow you, I will fill hell with you all!"
"Adam, reside with your mate in the paradise, and eat from wherever you please; but do not approach this tree or you will be of the wicked."*
But the devil whispered to them, to reveal their bodies which was hidden from them; and he said, "Your Lord did not forbid you from this tree except that you would become angels, or you would be immortals."
He swore to them: "I am giving good advice."
So he misled them with deception; and when they tasted the tree, their bodies became apparent to them, and they rushed to cover themselves with the leaves of the paradise; and their Lord called to them: "Did I not forbid you from that tree, and tell you that the devil is your clear enemy?"*
They said, "Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves and if You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, then we will be of the losers!"
He said, "Descend as enemies to one another; on earth you will have residence and provisions until the appointed time."
He said, "In it you will live and in it you will die, and from it you will be brought forth."
O Children of Adam, We have sent down for you garments to cover your bodies, as well as ornaments; and the garment of awareness is the best. That is from God's signs, perhaps they will remember.*
O Children of Adam, do not let the devil afflict you as he evicted your parents from the paradise; removing from them their garments to show them their bodies. He and his tribe see you from where you do not see them. We have made the devils as allies for those who do not acknowledge.*
When they commit evil acts, they say, "We found our fathers doing such, and God ordered us to it." Say, "God does not order evil! Do you say about God what you do not know?"*
Say, "My Lord orders justice, and that you be devoted at every temple, and that you call on Him, while being faithful to Him in the system; as He initiated you, so you will return."*
A group He has guided and a group has deserved misguidance; that is because they have taken the devils as allies besides God; and they think they are guided!
O Children of Adam, dress nicely at every temple, and eat and drink and do not indulge or waste; He does not like the indulgers and the prodigals.
Say, "Who has forbidden the nice things that God has brought forth for His servants and the good provisions?" Say, "They are in this worldly life for those who acknowledge, and they will be exclusive for them on the day of Resurrection" We thus explain the signs for those who know.*
Say, "My Lord has forbidden all lewd action, what is obvious from them and what is subtle, and sin, aggression without cause, your setting up partners with God that were never authorized by Him, and saying about God what you do not know."
For every nation will be an allotted time; when their time is reached, they will not delay by one moment nor advance it.
O Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from amongst yourselves and narrate My signs to you; then for those who are aware, and reform, there will be no fear over them nor will they grieve.
As for those who reject Our signs, and become arrogant towards them; then these are the dwellers of the fire, in it they will abide"
Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God, or denies His signs? These will receive their recompense from the book; so that when Our messengers come to take them, they will say, "Where are those whom you used to call on besides God?" they said, "They have abandoned us!" and they bore witness upon themselves that they were ingrates.
He said, "Enter with the multitude of nations before you from humans and Jinn to the fire!" Every time a nation entered, it cursed its sister nation, until they are all gathered inside it; then the last of them says to the first: "Our Lord, these are the ones who have misguided us, so give them double the retribution of the fire!" He replied: "Each will receive double, but you do not know."*
The first of them said to the last: "You have no preference over us, so taste the retribution for what you earned!"
Those who have denied Our signs, and reacted to them with arrogance, the gates of the sky will not open for them, nor will they enter paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle. It is such that We recompense the criminals.*
They will have hell as an abode, and from above them will be barriers. It is thus We recompense the wicked.
As for those who acknowledge and do good; We do not burden a person beyond its capacity; those are the dwellers of paradise, in it they will abide.
We removed what was in their chests of jealousy and hidden enmity; rivers will flow beneath them; and they will say, "Praise be to God who has guided us to this, and we would not have been guided unless God guided us. The messengers of our Lord had come with truth." It will be announced to them: "This is paradise; you have inherited it for what you have done."
The companions of paradise called the dwellers of the fire: "We have found what our Lord promised us to be true; did you find what your Lord promised to be true?" They said, "Indeed!" Then a caller announced between them: "God's curse is on the wicked."
"The ones who hinder from the path of God, and seek to distort it, are the rejecters of the Hereafter."
A barrier separates them. At the identification station there are pedestrians who recognize others by their features. They called out to the dwellers of paradise: "Peace be upon you!" They have not yet entered it, but they are hoping.*
When their eyes are turned towards the dwellers of the fire, they say, "Our Lord, do not make us with the wicked people!"
Those attending the identification station called on men they recognized by their features, they said, "What good did your large number do for you, or what you were arrogant for?"*
"Weren't these the ones whom you swore God would not grant them of His mercy? "Enter paradise, there is no fear for you nor will you grieve."
The dwellers of the fire called on the dwellers of paradise: "Give us some water, or what God has provided for you?" They said, "God has forbidden it for the ingrates."
The ones who took their system as diversion and games, and were preoccupied with this worldly life. Today we ignore them as they ignored their meeting on this day, and they denied Our signs.
We have brought them a book which We have detailed with knowledge; a guide and a mercy to those who acknowledge.*
Are they waiting for its fulfillment? On the day which its fulfillment happens, those who previously forgot it will say, "Our Lord's messengers have come with truth! Are there any intercessors to intercede for us? Or could we be returned so that we may act differently than what we did?" They have lost themselves and what they have invented has abandoned them.
Your Lord is God who created the heavens and earth in six days, and then He established the authority. The night covers the day, which seeks it continually; and the sun and the moon and the stars are all subjected to His law; to Him is the creation and the law. Glory be to God, the Lord of the worlds.*
Call on your Lord openly and in secret. He does not like the aggressors.
Do not corrupt the earth after it has been reformed; and call on Him out of fear and want. God's mercy is near to the righteous.
He is the One who sends the winds to be dispersed between His hands of mercy; so when it carries a heavy cloud, We drive it to a dead town, and We send down the water with it and We bring forth fruits of all kind. Thus We will bring out the dead, perhaps you may remember.
As for the good town, its plants are produced by its Lord's permission, while the inferior land does not produce except very little. It is such that We cite the signs for a people who are thankful.
We have sent Noah to his people, so he said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. I fear for you the retribution of a great day!"
The leaders from his people said, "We see that you are clearly misguided."
He said, "My people, I am not misguided, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds."
"I deliver to you my Lord's messages, I advise you, and I know from God what you do not know."
"Are you surprised that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from amongst you to warn you so that you become aware, and that you may receive mercy?"
They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We drowned those who denied Our signs; they were a blind people.
To Aad We sent their brother Hud, he said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. Will you not be aware?"
The leaders who rejected from among his people said, "We see you in foolishness, and we think you are one of the liars"
He said, "My people, there is no foolishness in me, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds."
"To deliver to you my Lord's messages, and to you I am a trustworthy advisor."
"Are you surprised that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from amongst you to warn you? Recall that he made you successors after the people of Noah, and He increased you in status. So recall God's blessings that you may succeed."*
They said, "Have you come to us to serve God alone and abandon what our fathers had served? Bring us what you promise if you are of the truthful ones!"
He said, "An affliction and wrath shall befall you from your Lord. Do you argue with me over names which you and your fathers have created with no authority being sent down by God? Wait then, and I will wait with you."*
We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us, and We destroyed the remnant of those who rejected Our signs and did not acknowledge.
To Thamud, We sent their brother Saleh, he said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him; proof has come to you from your Lord. This is God's camel, in her you have a sign, so leave her to eat in God's land, and do not harm her, else a painful retribution will take you."
"Recall that He made you successors after Aad, and He established you in the land so that you make palaces on its plains, and you carve homes in the mountains. So recall God's grace, and do not roam the earth as corrupters."
The leaders who were arrogant from among his people said to those who had acknowledged among the powerless: "How do you know that Saleh was sent from his Lord?" They said, "We acknowledge the message he has been sent with."
Those who were arrogant said, "We reject what you acknowledge!"
They thus killed the camel and defied their Lord's command, and they said, "O Saleh, bring us what you promised us if you are of the messengers!"
The earthquake took them, so they fell motionless in their homes.
Thus he turned away from them, and said, "My people, I had delivered to you the message of my Lord and advised you; but you do not like the advisers."
And Lot, when he said to his people: "Do you commit lewdness to an extend that none in the worlds had surpassed you?"
"You come to men with desire instead of women; you are a transgressing people."
The only response of his people was, "Drive them out of your town; they are a people who wish to be pure!"
We saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was of those who lagged behind.
We showered them with a shower, so see what the punishment for the criminals was.
To Midian, their brother Shuayb, he said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. Proof has come to you from your Lord, so give full weight and measure, and do not hold back from the people what belongs to them, and do not make mischief on the earth after it has been reformed. That is better for you if you acknowledge."
"Do not stand on every road to threaten and repel from the path of God those who acknowledged Him, by attempting to distort it. Recall that you were few and He multiplied you; and see what the retribution of the troublemakers is."
"If a group of you acknowledges what I have been sent with, and another group rejects, then wait until God judges between us. He is the best of judges."
The leaders who became arrogant from among his people said, "We will evict you Shuayb, along with those who acknowledged, or else you will return to our creed!" He said, "Even though we detest?"
"We would then be inventing lies about God if we return to your creed after God had saved us from it; and we would not return to it except if God our Lord wishes. Our Lord encompasses everything with knowledge. In God we put our trust. Our Lord, separate between us and between our people with truth, you are the best separator."
The leaders who rejected from among his people said, "If you follow Shuayb, then you are losers."
The earthquake took them, thus they fell motionless in their homes.
Those who denied Shuayb, it is as if they never prospered therein. Those who denied Shuayb, they were the losers.
Thus he turned away from them, and said, "My people, I had delivered to you the messages of my Lord and advised you. How can I feel sorry over a rejecting people?"
Whenever We sent a prophet to any town, We would afflict its people with hardship and adversity so that they may implore.
Then We replaced the bad with the good until they had plenty and they said, "Our fathers were the ones afflicted by hardship, and adversity." We then take them suddenly, while they do not perceive.
If the people of the towns had only acknowledged and been aware, then We would have opened for them blessings from the sky and the land; but they denied, so We took them for what they used to earn.
Are the people of the towns sure that Our punishment will not come to them at night while they are sleeping?
Or are the people of the towns sure that Our punishment will not come to them during the late morning while they are playing?
Have they become sure about God's scheming? None feels secure about God's scheming except the losing people.
Is it not clear for those who inherited the land after them, that if We wished, We could have punished them immediately for their sins and We could have stamped on their hearts, so they would not hear.
These are the towns whose stories We relate to you; their messengers had come to them with proofs, but they would not acknowledge what they had denied before. It is such that God stamps on the hearts of the ingrates.
We did not find most of them up to their pledge, rather, We found most of them corrupt.
Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leaders. But they treated them with prejudice, so see what the end of the corrupters is.
Moses said, "O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds."
"It is not proper for me to say about God except the truth; I have come to you with proof from your Lord. So send with me the Children of Israel."
He said, "If you have come with a sign then bring it, if you are of the truthful?"
He threw down his staff and there it was an obvious serpent.
He drew out his hand, and it became pure white for the spectators.
The commanders among the people of Pharaoh said, "This is a knowledgeable magician!"
"He wishes to drive you out of your land; what do you recommend?"
They said, "Delay him and his brother, and send gatherers to the cities."
"They will come to you with every knowledgeable magician."
The magicians came to Pharaoh and said, "There should be a reward for us if we are the victors."
He said, "Yes, and you will be made close to me."
They said, "O Moses, either you cast, or shall we cast?"
He said, "You cast." So when they cast, they deceived the people's eyes, intimidated them, and they produced a great magic.*
We inspired Moses: "Throw down your staff;" and soon it was swallowing what they had invented.
Thus the truth was confirmed, and what they were doing was falsified.
They were thus defeated there, and they turned in disgrace.
The magicians fell down prostrating.
They said, "We acknowledge the Lord of the worlds."
"The Lord of Moses and Aaron."
Pharaoh said, "Did you acknowledge him before I have given you permission? This is surely some scheme which you have schemed in the city to drive its people out; but soon you shall know."
"I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides; then I will crucify you all."
They said, "To our Lord shall we return."
"You are only seeking revenge on us because we acknowledged our Lord's signs when they came to us. Our Lord, grant us patience and let us die having peacefully surrendered."
The leaders among the people of Pharaoh said, "Will you let Moses and his people corrupt the land, and abandon you and your gods?" He said, "We will kill their children and shame their women; we will be supreme over them."
Moses said to his people: "Seek help with God, and be patient; for the land is God's. He will inherit it to whom He pleases of His servants; and the victory belongs to the righteous."
They said, "We were being harmed before you came to us and since you have come to us." He said, "Perhaps your Lord will destroy your enemy, and make you successors in the land, so He sees how you behave."
We then afflicted the people of Pharaoh with years of drought, a shortage in crops, so that they might take heed.
When any good comes to them, they say, "This is ours," and when any bad afflicts them, they blame it on Moses and those with him. Their blame is with God, but most of them do not know.
They said, "No matter what you bring us of a sign to bewitch us with, we will never acknowledge you."
So We sent them the flood, the locust, the lice, the frogs, and the blood; all detailed signs; but they turned arrogant, they were a criminal people.*
When the plague befell them, they said, "O Moses, call on your Lord for what pledge He gave you. If you remove this plague from us, then we will acknowledge you and we will send with you the Children of Israel."
So when We removed from them the plague until a future time; they broke their pledge.
For their denial and disregard of Our signs, We thus inflicted them with punishment by drowning them in the sea,
We let the people who were oppressed inherit the east and the west of the land which We have blessed, and good word of your Lord was completed towards the Children of Israel. For they were patient, and We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were doing, and what they contrived.
We let the Children of Israel cross the sea, then they passed by a people who were devoted to idols they had. They said, "O Moses, make for us a god like the gods they have." He said, "You are an ignorant people!"
"These people are ruined for what they are in, and worthless is what they do."
He said, "Shall I seek other than God as a god for you when He has preferred you over the worlds?"
When We saved you from the people of Pharaoh, who were afflicting you with the worst punishment, killing your children and shaming your women; and in that was a great trial from your Lord.
We appointed for Moses thirty nights and completed them with ten, so the appointed time of his Lord was completed at forty nights. Moses said to his brother Aaron: "Be my successor with my people and reform, and do not follow the path of the corrupters."*
So when Moses came to Our appointed time, and his Lord spoke to him, he said, "My Lord, let me look upon you." He said, "You will not see Me, but look upon the mountain, if it stays in its place then you will see Me." So, when his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain, He caused it to crumble; thus Moses fell unconscious. When he recovered, he said, "Glory be to You, I repent to You and I am the first of those who acknowledge."*
He said, "O Moses, I have chosen you over people with My message and My words; so take what I have given you and be of the thankful."
We wrote for him on the tablets from everything a lesson, and detailing all things. You shall uphold them firmly and order your people to take the best from it. I will show you the abode of the corrupt.*
I will divert from My signs those who are arrogant on earth unjustly, and if they see every sign they do not acknowledge it, and if they see the path of guidance they do not take it as a path; and if they see the path of straying, they take it as a path. That is because they have denied Our signs and were heedless of them.*
Those who deny Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, their work has collapsed. Will they not be rewarded except for what they used to do?
The people of Moses, in his absence, made from their ornaments the statue of a calf which had a sound. Did they not see that it could not speak to them, nor guide them to any way. They took it and turned wicked.*
When they were smitten with remorse and they saw that they had gone astray, they said, "If our Lord will not have mercy on us and forgive us, then we will be of the losers!"
When Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said, "Miserable is what you have done after me; do you wish to hasten the action of your Lord?" He cast down the tablets, and took his brother by his head dragging him towards him. He said, "Son of my mother, the people overpowered me and nearly killed me, so do not make the enemies rejoice over me, and do not make me with the wicked people."*
He said, "My Lord, forgive me and my brother, and admit us in your mercy; you are the most Compassionate of the compassionate."
Those who took up the calf will be dealt with a wrath from their Lord and a humiliation in this worldly life. We thus punish the fabricators.
As for those who commit sin but then repent afterwards and acknowledge; your Lord afterward is Forgiving, Compassionate.
When the anger subsided from Moses, he took the tablets; and in its inscription was a guidance and mercy for those who revere their Lord.
Moses selected from his people seventy men for Our appointed time; so when the quake seized them, he said, "My Lord, if You wished You could have destroyed them before this, and me as well. Will you destroy us for what the foolish amongst us have done? It is all Your test, You misguide with it whom You please and You guide with it whom You please. You are our supporter, so forgive us and have mercy on us; You are the best forgiver."*
"Decree for us good in this world, and in the Hereafter; we have been guided towards You." He said, "I will afflict with My punishment whom I chose, but My mercy encompasses all things. I will thus decree it for those who are aware and contribute towards betterment, and those who acknowledge Our signs."*
"Those who follow the gentile prophet whom they find written for them in the Torah and the Injeel; he orders them to goodness, deters them from evil, he makes lawful for them the good things, he forbids for them the evil, and he removes their burden and the shackles imposed upon them. So those who acknowledged him, honored him, supported him, and followed the light that was sent down with him; these are the successful."*
Say, "O people, I am God's messenger to you all. The One who has the sovereignty of heavens and earth, there is no god but He; He gives life and causes death." So acknowledge God and His gentile prophet, who acknowledges God and His words; and follow him that you may be guided.*
Among the people of Moses are a nation who guide with truth and with it they become just.
We separated them into twelve tribes as nations; and We inspired Moses when his people wanted to drink: "Strike the rock with your staff," thus twelve springs burst forth. Every group knew where from to drink. We shaded them with clouds and We sent down to them manna and quail: "Eat from the good things that We have provided for you." They did not wrong Us, but it was themselves that they wronged.
When they were told: "Reside in this town and eat from it as you please, talk amicably and enter the passage by prostrating, We will then forgive for you your wrong doings. We will increase for the good doers."
Those who were wicked amongst them altered what was said to them with something different; so We sent to them a pestilence from the sky because they were wicked.
Ask them about the town which was by the sea, after they had transgressed the Sabbath; their fish would come to them openly on the day of their Sabbath, and when they were not in Sabbath, they would not come to them! It is such that We afflicted them for what they corrupted.
A nation from amongst them said, "Why do you preach to a people whom God will destroy or punish a painful retribution?" They said, "To fulfill our duty to your Lord, and perhaps they may become aware."
So when they forgot what they were reminded of, We saved those who desisted from evil, and We took those who transgressed with a grievous retribution for what they were corrupting.
When they persisted in what they had been forbidden from, We said to them: "Be despicable apes!"*
Furthermore, your Lord declared that He will rise against them people who would inflict severe persecution on them, until the day of Resurrection. Your Lord is quick to punish, and He is Forgiving, Compassionate.
We divided them through the land as nations. From them are the reformed, and from them are other than that. We tested them with good things and bad, perhaps they will return.
A generation came after them who inherited the book, but they indulged in the petty materials of this world by saying, "It will be forgiven for us." They continued choosing materials, whenever they were given a chance. Did they not make a covenant to uphold the book that they would only say the truth about God? They studied what was in it; but the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who are aware. Do you not reason?
As for those who adhere to the book, and they hold the contact prayer; We will not waste the reward of the reformers.
When We raised the mountain above them as if it were a cloud, and they thought it would fall on them: "Take what We have given you with strength and remember what is in it that you may be aware."
When your Lord took from the children of Adam from their backs, their progeny; and He made them witness over themselves: "Am I not your Lord?" They said, "Yes, we bear witness." Thus you cannot say on the day of Resurrection that you were unaware of this.*
Nor can you say, "It was our fathers who set up partners before and we were simply a progeny who came after them. Would You destroy us for what the innovators did?"
We thus explain the signs, perhaps they will return.*
Relate to them the news of the person whom We gave him Our signs, but he withdrew from them, and thus the devil followed him, and He became of those who went astray.
Had We willed, We could have elevated him by it, but he stuck to the earth and he followed his wishful thinking. His example is like the dog; if you scold him he pants, and if you leave him he pants; such is the example of the people who deny Our signs. Relate the stories, perhaps they will think.
Miserable is the example of the people who denied Our signs, and it was themselves that they had wronged.
Whoever God guides, then he is the guided one; and whoever He misguides, then these are the losers.
We have committed to hell many Jinns and humans. They have hearts, yet they do not comprehend; they have eyes yet they do not see; they have ears yet they do not hear. They are like cattle; no, they are even more astray. These are the heedless ones.
To God belong the beautiful names, so call Him by them; and disregard those who blaspheme in His names. They will be punished for what they used to do.*
From among those We created is a community who guides with truth, and with it they establish justice.
As for those who deny Our signs, We will gradually lead them from where they do not know.
I will respite them, for My scheming is formidable.
Do they not reflect that their companion is not crazy; but he is a clear warner.
Do they not look at the dominion of heavens and earth, and all that God has created, and perhaps their time is drawing near? In which hadith after this one will they acknowledge?*
Whoever God misguides, then there is none to guide him; and He leaves them blundering in their transgression.
They ask you regarding the moment: "When will be its time?" Say, "Its knowledge is with my Lord, none can reveal its time except Him. It is heavy through the heavens and the earth; it will not come to you except suddenly." They ask you, as if you are too curious about it! Say, "Its knowledge is with God, but most people do not know."*
Say, "I do not possess for myself any benefit or harm, except what God wills. If I could know the future, then I would have increased my good fortune, and no harm would have come to me. I am but a warner and a bearer of good news to a people who acknowledge."*
He is the One who created you from one person, and He made from it its mate to attain tranquility. When he covered her, she became pregnant with a light load, and she continued with it. When it became heavy, they called on God, their Lord: "If You give us a healthy child, then we will be among the thankful."
But when He gave them a healthy child, they made partners with Him in what He had given them. God be exalted above what they set up as partners.
Do they set up those who do not create anything, while they are created?
They cannot help them, nor can they help themselves?
If you invite them to the guidance they will not follow you. It is the same whether you invite them or simply remain silent.
Those whom you call on besides God are servants like you; so let them answer for you if you are truthful.
Do they have feet to walk with? Or do they have hands to strike with? Or do they have eyes to see with? Or do they have ears to hear with? Say, "Call on your partners, then scheme against me with no respite."
"My supporter is God who sent down the book; and He takes care of the good-doers."
As for those whom you call on beside Him, they cannot help you, nor can they help themselves.
If you invite them to the guidance, they do not listen; you see them looking at you, while they do not see.
You shall resort to pardoning, and advocate recognition, and turn away from the ignorant ones.
If a provocation from the devil incites you, then seek refuge with God. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Those who are aware, when a visit from the devil touches them, they remember; soon they are seers.
But their brethren plunge them into error; they do not cease.
Since you do not bring them a sign, they say, "If only you had brought one." Say, "I only follow what is inspired to me from my Lord. These are enlightenments from your Lord, a guide and a mercy to a people who acknowledge."
If the Quran is being recited, then listen to it and pay attention, so that you may receive mercy.
Remember your Lord in yourself out of humility and fear, and without being loud during the morning and the evening. Do not be of the heedless ones.
Those who are at your Lord, they are never too proud to serve Him, and they glorify Him, and to Him they prostrate.
They ask you regarding the spoils of war, say, "The spoils of war are for God and the messenger." So be aware of God, and peacefully reform the matters between you; and obey God and His messenger if you are those who acknowledge.*
The acknowledgers are those whom, when God is mentioned, their hearts tremble; when His signs are recited to them, it strengthens their acknowledgement; and they put their trust in their Lord.
They hold the contact prayer, and from Our provisions to them they spend.
These are the true acknowledgers; they will have ranks at their Lord, forgiveness, and a generous provision.
As your Lord made you go out from your home with the truth, but a party from among those who acknowledge opposed this.
They argue with you about the truth when it has been made clear; as if they were being herded towards death while they are watching!
God promises you that one of the two parties will be defeated by you; yet you wish that the one least armed be the one. But God wishes that the truth be manifest with His words, and that He eliminates the remnant of the ingrates.
So that truth will be manifest and the falsehood will be falsified; even if the criminals oppose it.
You implored your Lord and He answered you: "I will provide you with one thousand angels as defenders."
God did not do this except to give you good news, and that your hearts may be assured by it. Victory is only from God; God is Noble, Wise.
A peaceful sleep from Him overcame you, and He sent down to you water from the sky to cleanse you with it. He caused the affliction of the devil to leave you so that He may fortify your hearts and set firm your feet.
Your Lord inspired to the angels: "I am with you so keep firm those who acknowledge. I will cast fear into the hearts of those who have rejected; so strike above the necks, and strike every finger."*
That is because they have aggressed against God and His messenger. Whoever aggresses against God and His messenger, then God is severe in retribution.
This is for you to sample, and for the ingrates will be retribution of fire.
O you who acknowledge; when you encounter those who have rejected on the battlefield, do not flee from them.
Whoever on that day flees from them; unless it is part of the battle strategy or if he is retreating back to his group; then he has drawn God's wrath upon him, and his abode will be hell. What a miserable destiny.
It was not you who killed them, but it was God who killed them. It was not you who launched when you did, but it was God who launched. So that those who acknowledge would be tested well by Him. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
That, and God weakens the plots of the ingrates.
If you sought conquest, then conquest has come to you. But if you cease, then it is better for you. If you return again, then We will also return, and your group will avail you nothing even if it is many. God is with those who acknowledge.
O you who acknowledge, obey God and His messenger, and do not turn away from him while you have heard.
Do not be like those who have said, "We hear," but they do not hear.
The worst creatures with God are the deaf and dumb who do not reason.
If God had found any good in them, then He would have made them listen. But if He makes them listen, they would still turn away, averse.
O you who acknowledge, answer the call of God and His messenger when he calls you to what will grant you life. Know that God comes between a person and his heart, and that to Him you will be gathered.
Be aware of a test that will not only afflict those of you who were wicked; and know that God is severe in retribution.
Recall when you were but a few who were overpowered in the land, you were fearful that men might capture you. But He sheltered you, and He supported you with His victory, and He provided you with good provisions, so that you may be thankful.
O you who acknowledge, do not betray God and the messenger, nor betray your trusts, while you know.
You should know that your money and your children are a test, and that God has the greatest reward.
O you who acknowledge, if you are aware of God, He will make for you a distinction, and He will cancel your sins and forgive you. God is possessor of great favor.
The ingrates plot against you to confine you, to kill you, or to expel you. They plot, and God plots, and God is the best of plotters.
When Our signs are recited to them, they say, "We have listened, and if we wish, we could have said the same thing. This is nothing but tales of the ancients!"
They said, "Our god, if this is the truth from You, then send down upon us a rain of stones from the sky or bring on us a painful retribution."
But God was not to punish them while you are with them, nor will God punish them while they continue to seek forgiveness.
Why should God not punish them when they are turning others away from the Restricted Temple, and they were never its protectors! Its protectors are the righteous. But most of them do not know.
Their contact prayer at the sanctuary was nothing but deception/noise and aversion. Taste the retribution for what you have rejected.*
Those who have rejected, they spend their money to turn others away from the path of God. They will spend it, then it will become a source of regret for them, then they are defeated. Those who rejected will be summoned to hell.
This is so that God will distinguish the bad from the good, and so that the bad will be gathered together into one heap; then He will cast it all into hell. These are the losers.
Say to the ingrates: "If they cease, then what has passed before will be forgiven to them, and if they return to it, then the example of the previous generations has already been given."*
You should fight them all until there is no more oppression, and so that the entire system is God's. But if they cease, then God is seer of what they do.
If they turn away, then know that God is your Patron. What an excellent Patron, and what an excellent Victor.*
You should know: "Of anything you gain, that one-fifth shall go to God and the messenger: to the relatives, the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer." You will do this if you acknowledge God and in what We revealed to Our servant on the day of distinction, the day the two armies clashed. God is able to do all things.*
When you were on the near side, and they were on the far side, then the supply line became directly beneath you. Had you planned for this meeting, you would have disagreed on its timing, but God was to enforce a command that was already done. So that He would destroy those to be destroyed with proof, and to let those who will live be alive with proof. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
God shows them to you as being few in your dream, and had He shown them to be many, then you would have failed and you would have disputed in the matter; it was God who saved you. He is the Knower of what is inside the chests.*
He showed them to you when you met as being few to your eyes, and He made you appear as being fewer to their eyes. That was so God's decree would come to be; and to God all matters are returned.
O you who acknowledge, when you meet a force, stand firm and mention God frequently, that you may succeed.
You should obey God and His messenger, and do not dispute; else you will fail and your momentum will depart, and patiently persevere. God is with the ones who patiently persevere.
Do not be like those who came out from their homes to boast and to be seen by men, and they repel others away from the path of God. God surrounds of what they do.
The devil adorned their work for them, and he said, "None from the people can defeat you today, and I am by your side." But when the two forces came together, he turned on his heels to flee and he said, "I am innocent from you! I see what you do not see. I fear God, and God is severe in punishment."*
The hypocrites and those who have a disease in their hearts said, "These people have been deceived by their system." But whoever puts his trust in God, then God is Noble, Wise.
If you could only see as the angels take those who have rejected, they strike their faces and their backs: "Taste the punishment of the blazing fire!"
"This is for what your hands have put forth, and God does not wrong the servants."
Like the behavior of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them; they rejected God's signs, so God took them for their sins. God is Strong, severe in punishment.
That is because God was not to change anything He bestowed to a people, unless they change what is in themselves. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
Like the behavior of Pharaoh's people and those before them. They denied the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them by their sins, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh; all of them were wicked.
The worst creatures to God are those who reject, for they do not acknowledge.
The ones whom you made a pledge with them, then they break their pledge every time, and they do not care.
So, when you encounter them in battle, set them as an example to those who would come after them; perhaps they may remember.
If you are being betrayed by a people, then you shall likewise move against them. God does not like the betrayers.
Let not those who have rejected think that they have escaped; they will never avail themselves.
Prepare for them all that you can of might, and from horse powers, that you may instill fear with it towards God's enemy and your enemy, and others beside them whom you do not know but God knows them. Whatever you spend in the cause of God will be returned to you, and you will not be wronged.
If they seek peace, then you also seek it, and put your trust in God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
If they wish to deceive you, then God is sufficient for you. He is the One who supported you with His victory and with those who acknowledge.
He made unity between their hearts. Had you spent all that is on earth, you would not have united between their hearts, but God united between them. He is Noble, Wise.
O prophet, God is sufficient for you and those who acknowledged among your followers.*
O prophet, urge those who acknowledge to battle. If there are twenty of you who are patient, they will defeat two hundred. If there are one hundred of you, they will defeat one thousand from amongst those who reject; that is because they are a people who do not reason.
Now, God has lightened for you, for He knows that there is weakness in you. If there are one hundred of you who are patient, they will defeat two hundred. If there are one thousand of you, they will defeat two thousand by God's leave. God is with the patient.
It was not for any prophet to take prisoners unless it was in battle. You desire the materials of this world, while God wants the Hereafter for you. God is Noble, Wise.*
Had it not been previously ordained from God, then a severe punishment would have afflicted you for what you took.
So consume what you have gained, lawful and good, and be aware of God. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O prophet, say to those prisoners whom you hold: "If God finds in your hearts any good, He will grant you better than what He took from you, and He will forgive you. God is Forgiving, Compassionate."
If they want to betray you, they have already betrayed God before, and He overpowered them. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Those who have acknowledged and emigrated and strived with their money and lives in the cause of God, and those who sheltered and supported; these are the allies of one another. Those who acknowledged but did not emigrate, you do not owe them any allegiance until they emigrate. But if they seek your help in the system, then you must support them, except if it is against a people with whom there is a treaty between you. God is watcher over what you do.*
As for those who reject, they are allies to one another. If you do not do this, then there will be oppression on earth and great corruption.
Those who have acknowledged and emigrated and strived in the cause of God, and those who sheltered and supported, these are truly those who acknowledge. They will have forgiveness and a generous provision.
Those who acknowledged afterwards and emigrated and strived with you, then they are from you. The relatives by birth are also supportive of one another in God's book. God is aware of all things.
This is an ultimatum from God and His messenger to those who set up partners with whom you had entered a treaty.*
Therefore, roam the land for four months and know that you will not escape God, and that God will humiliate the ingrates.
A declaration from God and His messenger to the people, on this, the peak day of the Pilgrimage: "That God and His messenger are free from obligation to those who set up partners." If you repent, then it is better for you, but if you turn away, then know that you will not escape God. Promise those who have rejected of a painful retribution;*
Except for those with whom you had a treaty from among those who have set up partners if they did not reduce anything from it nor did they plan to attack you; you shall fulfill their terms until they expire. God loves the righteous.
So when the restricted months have passed, then you may kill those who have set up partners wherever you find them, take them, surround them, and stand against them at every point. If they repent, hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, then you shall leave them alone. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
If any of those who have set up partners seeks your protection, then you may protect him so that he may hear the words of God, then let him reach his sanctuary. This is because they are a people who do not know.
How can those who have set up partners have a pledge with God and with His messenger? Except for those with whom you made a pledge near the Restricted Temple, as long as they are upright with you, then you are upright with them. God loves the righteous.
How is it that when they come upon you they disregard all ties, either that of kinship or of pledge. They seek to please you with their words, but their hearts deny, and most of them are wicked.
They purchased with God's signs a small price, so they turn others from His path. Evil indeed is what they used to do.
They neither respect the ties of kinship nor a pledge for any those who acknowledge. These are the transgressors.
If they repent, and they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards betterment, then they are your brothers in the system. We explain the signs for a people who know.
If they break their oaths after their pledge, and they taunt and attack your system; then you may kill the chiefs of rejection. Their oaths are nothing to them, perhaps they will then cease.
Would you not fight a people who broke their oaths and intended to expel the messenger, especially while they were the ones who attacked you first? Do you fear them? It is God who is more worthy to be feared if you are those who acknowledge.
Fight them; perhaps God will punish them by your hands, humiliate them, grant you victory over them and heal the chests of an acknowledging people,
To remove the anger from their hearts; God pardons whom he pleases. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Or did you think that you would be left alone? God will come to know those of you who strived and did not take other than God and His messenger and those who acknowledge as helpers. God is Ever-aware in what you do.
It was not for those who have set up partners to maintain God's temples while they bear witness over their own rejection. For these, their works have fallen, and in the fire they will abide.
Rather, the temples of God are maintained by the one who acknowledges God and the Last day, holds the contact prayer, contributes towards betterment, and he does not fear except God. It is these that will be of the guided ones.
Have you made serving drink to the pilgrims and the maintenance of the Restricted Temple the same as one who acknowledges God and the Last day, who strives in the cause of God? They are not the same with God. God does not guide the wicked people.
Those who acknowledged, emigrated, strived in the cause of God with their wealth and their lives are in a greater degree with God. These are the winners.
Their Lord gives them good news of a Mercy from Him, acceptance, and gardens that are for them in which there is permanent bliss.
They will abide in it eternally. God has a great reward.
O you who acknowledge, do not take your fathers nor brothers as allies if they prefer rejection to acknowledgement. Whoever of you takes them as such, then these are the wicked.
Say, "If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your spouses, your clan, and money which you have gathered, a trade in which you fear a decline, and homes which you enjoy; if these are dearer to you than God and His messenger and striving in His cause, then wait until God brings His decision. God does not guide the wicked people."
God has granted you victory in many battlefields. On the day of Hunayn, when you were pleased with your great numbers but it did not help you at all, and the land became tight around you for what it held, then you turned to flee.
Then God sent down tranquility upon His messenger and those who acknowledge, and He sent down soldiers which you did not see. He thus punished those who rejected. Such is the recompense of the ingrates.
Then God will accept the repentance of whom He pleases after that. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, those who have set up partners are impure, so let them not approach the Restricted Temple after this calendar year of theirs. If you fear poverty, then God will enrich you from His blessings if He wills. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Fight those who do not acknowledge God nor the Last day among the people who received the book; they do not forbid what God and His messenger have forbidden, and they do not uphold the system of truth; until they pay the reparation, in humility.*
The Jews said, "Ezra is God's son," and the Nazarenes said, "The Messiah is God's son." Such is their utterances with their mouths; they imitate the sayings of those who rejected before them. God's curse be on them. How deviated are they!*
They took their scholars and priests to be lords besides God, and the Messiah son of Mary, while they were only commanded to serve One god, there is no god but He, be He glorified for what they set up.
They want to extinguish God's light with their mouths, but God refuses such and lets His light continue, even if the ingrates hate it.
He is the One who sent His messenger with guidance and the system of truth, to make it manifest above all other systems, even if those who set up partners hate it.*
O you who acknowledge, many of the scholars and priests consume people's money in falsehood, and they turn away from the path of God. Those who hoard gold and silver, and do not spend it in the cause of God, give them news of a painful retribution.
On the day when they will be seared in the fires of hell, their foreheads, sides and backs will be branded with it: "This is what you have hoarded for yourselves, so taste what you have hoarded!"
The count of the months with God is twelve months in God's book the day He created the heavens and the earth; four of them are restricted. This is the correct system; so do not wrong yourselves in them. Fight those who set up partners collectively as they fight you collectively. Know that God is with the righteous.*
Know that accelerating the intercalary is an addition in rejection; that those who have rejected may misguide with it. They make it lawful one calendar year, and they forbid it one calendar year, so as to circumvent the count that God has made restricted; thus they make lawful what God made forbidden! Their evil works have been adorned for them, and God does not guide the rejecting people.*
O you who acknowledge, what is wrong with you when you are told: "March forth in the cause of God," you become heavy on earth. Have you become content with this worldly life over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this worldly life compared to the Hereafter is nothing.
If you do not march forth, then He will punish you with a painful retribution, He will replace you with another people, and you do not bother Him in the least. God is capable of all things.
If you do not help him, then God has helped him. When those who rejected expelled him, he was one of only two, and when both were in the cave, he said to his friend: "Do not grieve, for God is with us." So God sent down tranquility over him and He supported him with soldiers that you did not see, and He made the word of those who rejected be the lowest, and God's word be the highest. God is Noble, Wise.
March forth in light gear or heavy gear, and strive with your money and lives in the cause of God. That is best if you knew.
If it were a near gain, or an easy journey, they would have followed you; but the distance was too much for them. They will swear by God: "If we could have, we would have come with you." They destroy themselves, and God knows they are liars.
God pardons you; why did you grant them leave before it became clear to you who are truthful, and who are lying?
Those who acknowledge God and the Last day will not ask leave. They strive with their money and their lives. God is aware of the righteous.
Those who ask leave are the ones who do not acknowledge God and the Last day, and their hearts are in doubt. In their doubts they are wavering.*
If they had gone with you then they would have taken all preparation for it, but God disliked their being sent forth, so He hindered them, and they were told: "Stay with those who have stayed."
Had they come out with you they would have added nothing but disorder, and they would have hurried about seeking a test among you. There are some amongst you who listen to them. God is aware of the wicked.
They wanted to test from before, and they turned matters upside down for you until the truth came and God's command was revealed, while they hated it.
Some of them say, "Grant me leave, and do not test me." But it is in the test that they have indeed fallen, and hell is surrounding the ingrates.
When any good befalls you, it upsets them, and if any bad befalls you, they say, "We have taken our precautions beforehand," and they turn away rejoicing.
Say, "Nothing will befall us except what God has decreed for us; He is our Patron." In God those who acknowledge shall put their trust.*
Say, "While we wait for you to be afflicted by God with retribution from Him, or at our hands you can only expect for us one of two good things. So wait, we are with you waiting."
Say, "Spend willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you. You are a wicked people."
What prevented the acceptance of their spending was that they rejected God and His messenger, and they do not attend to the contact prayer except lazily, and they do not spend except unwillingly.*
So do not be impressed by their wealth or children; God only wishes to punish them with it in the worldly life, and so that their lives will end while they are ingrates.
They swear by God that they are with you, while they are not with you; but they are timid and divisive people.
If they could find a refuge, a cave, or any place to enter, then they would have run to it, rushing.
Some of them are those who criticize you regarding the charities. If they are given from it, they are content; but if they are not given from it, they become enraged!
If only they were content with what God and His messenger had given them, and had said, "God suffices us; God will give us from His bounty, and so His messenger; it is to God that we desire."
The charities are to go to the poor, the needy, those who work on their collection, those whose hearts are to be reconciled, free the slaves, those in debt, in the cause of God, and to the wayfarer. A duty from God; God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Among them are those who hurt the prophet, and they say, "He only listens!" Say, "What he listens to is best for you. He acknowledges God, he trusts those who acknowledge, and he is a mercy to those who acknowledge among you." Those who hurt God's messenger will have a painful retribution.
They swear to you by God in order to please you; while God and His messenger is more worthy to be pleased if they were those who acknowledge.
Did they not know that whoever is hostile towards God and His messenger, he will have the fire of hell to abide in. Such is the greatest humiliation.
The hypocrites fear that a chapter will be sent down against them exposing what is in their hearts. Say, "Mock, for God will bring out what you fear."
If you ask them they say, "We were only jesting and playing." Say, "Is it in God and His signs and His messenger you were mocking?"
Do not apologize, for you have rejected after your acknowledgement. Even if We pardon one group from you, We will punish another group, because they were criminals.
The hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, they are the same. They order evil, deter from good, and they are tightfisted. They ignored God, so He ignored them; the hypocrites are the wicked.
God has promised the hypocrite men and women and the ingrates a fire in hell, in it they will abide; it suffices them. God has cursed them and they will have a lasting retribution.
Like those before you; they were more powerful than you, and had more wealth and offspring. They enjoyed their lot, and you enjoyed your lot as those before you enjoyed their lives; and you indulged as they indulged. These are those whose works crumbled in this world and the hereafter, and they were the losers.
Had not the news of those before them come to them, the people of Noah and Aad and Thamud. The people of Abraham, and the dwellers of Midian, and those overthrown. Their messengers came to them with proofs; it was not God who wronged them, but it was themselves that they wronged.
The acknowledging men and women, they are allies to one another. They order good and deter from evil, and they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards betterment, and they obey God and His messenger. God will have mercy on them; God is Noble, Wise.
God has promised the acknowledging men and women gardens with rivers flowing beneath it, in which they will abide, and pleasing homes in the everlasting gardens. The acceptance from God is the most important; such is the greatest success.
O prophet, strive against the ingrates and the hypocrites and be firm against them. Their dwelling is hell, what a miserable destiny!
They swear by God that they did not say it, while they had said the word of rejection, and they rejected after they had peacefully surrendered, and they were concerned with what they could not possess; and they could not find any fault except that God and His messenger had enriched them from His bounty. If they repent it is better for them, and if they turn away, then God will punish them severely in this world and the next. They will not have on earth any ally or supporter.
Some of them pledged to God: "If He gives us from His bounty, then we will acknowledge and we will be amongst the reformed."
Yet when He gave them of His bounty, they became stingy with it, and they turned away in aversion.
Thus, they ended up with hypocrisy in hearts until the day they meet Him; that is for breaking what they promised to God, and for what they were lying.
Did they not know that God knows their secrets, their conspiracies, and that God is the knower of all the unseen?
God mocks those who criticize the generous acknowledgers for giving too much; and disdain those who do not have anything to give but their effort, God disdains them, and they will have a painful retribution.
Whether you seek forgiveness for them, or do not seek forgiveness for them. If you seek forgiveness for them seventy times, God will not forgive them. That is because they have rejected God and His messenger; and God does not guide the wicked people.*
Those who were left behind rejoiced their staying behind God's messenger, and they disliked to strive with their wealth and lives in the cause of God. They said, "Do not march out in the heat." Say, "The fire of hell is far hotter." If they could only understand!
Let them laugh a little, and cry a lot, as a recompense for what they had earned.
If God returns you to a group of them, and they ask your permission to come with you, then say, "You will not come with me ever; nor will you fight any enemy with me. You had accepted staying behind the first time, so stay with those who remain behind."
Do not show support for anyone of them who dies, nor stand at his grave. They have rejected God and His messenger and died while they were wicked.
Do not also be impressed by their wealth and their children; God only wishes to punish them with it in this world, and their selves will vanish while they are ingrates.
If a chapter is sent down: "That you shall acknowledge God and strive with His messenger," those with wealth and influence ask your permission and they say, "Let us be with those who remain behind."
They were content to stay with those who remained behind, and it was stamped on their hearts, for they do not reason.
But the messenger and those who acknowledge with him have strived with their money and their lives. For them will be the good things, and they are the successful ones.
God has prepared for them gardens with rivers flowing beneath, in them they shall abide. Such is the great gain.
Those who made excuses from among the Arabs came to get permission. Thus, those who denied God and His messenger stayed behind. Those who rejected from them will be inflicted with a painful retribution.
There is no blame to be placed upon the weak, the sick, or those who do not find anything to spend on, as long as they are sincere to God and His messenger. There is no argument against the good doers; and God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Nor upon those who come to ride out with you, while you said, "I do not have any mounts for you;" they turned away while their eyes were flooded with tears out of sadness, for they could not find anything to contribute.
Indeed, the argument is against those who sought your permission to stay while they had the means. They accepted to be with those who remained behind; God stamped their hearts, for they do not know.
They will apologize to you when you return to them. Say, "Do not apologize; we will no longer trust you, for God has told us of your news." God will see your work, as will His messenger, then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the seen, He will inform you of what you did.
They will swear by God to you when you return to them, so that you may overlook them. So overlook them, for they are tainted, and their destiny is hell as a recompense for what they earned.
They swear to you so that you would accept them. Even if you accept them, God does not accept the wicked people.
The Arabs are the worst in rejection and hypocrisy, and more likely not to know the limits of what God has sent down upon His messenger. God is Knower, Wise.
From the Arabs are some who look upon what they spend as a fine, and wait for disasters to befall you. They will have the evil disasters, and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
From the Arabs there is he who acknowledges God and the Last day, and considers his spending as a means towards God, and the support of the messenger. It indeed makes them closer. God will admit them in His mercy; God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
The pioneers of the emigrants and the supporters, and those who followed them in kindness; God has accepted them, and they have accepted Him; and He prepared for them gardens with rivers flowing beneath in which they will abide eternally. Such is the great success.
Among the Arabs around you are hypocrites, as well as from the city people; they are audacious in hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We know them. We will punish them twice, then they will be returned to a great punishment.
Others who have acknowledged their sins, they have mixed good work with bad. Perhaps God will pardon them. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Take from their money a charity to purify them and improve them with it, and support them. Your support is tranquility for them; and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.
Did they not know that it is God who accepts repentance from His servants, and He takes the charities, and that God is the Pardoner, Compassionate.
Say, "Work, and God will see your work and so His messenger and those who acknowledge. You will be sent back to the knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you did."
Others are waiting for God's decision; either He will punish them, or He will pardon them. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
There are those who establish a temple to do harm and cause rejection, to cause division among those who acknowledge, and as an outpost for those who fought God and His messenger before. They will swear that they only wanted to do good, but God bears witness that they are liars.
You shall never stand there. A temple that is founded on righteousness from the first day is more worthy of your standing; in it are men who love to be cleansed. God loves the cleansed.
Is one who lays his foundation on obtaining awareness from God and His acceptance better, or one who lays his foundation on the edge of a cliff which is about to crumble, so that it crumbled with him into the fires of hell? God does not guide the wicked people.
Such a structures that they erect will never cease to cause doubt in their hearts, until their hearts are severed. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
God has purchased from those who acknowledge their very lives and their wealth; that they will have paradise. They fight in the cause of God so they kill and are killed. A promise that is true upon Him in the Torah, the Injeel and the Quran. Whoever fulfills his pledge to God, then have good news of the deal which you concluded with. Such is the supreme success.
They are the repenters, the servers, the praisers, the activists, the bowing, the prostrating, the advocators of good, the forbidders of evil, and the keepers of God's ordinance. Give good news to those who acknowledge.
It is not for the prophet and those who acknowledge that they should seek forgiveness for those who have set up partners, even if they are relatives, after it has been made clear to them that they are the dwellers of hell.
Abraham seeking forgiveness for his father was only because of a promise he made to him. But when it became clear that he was God's enemy, he disowned him. Abraham was kind, compassionate.
God will never mislead a people after He guided them, until He makes clear to them what they should be aware. God is knower of all things.
To God is the sovereignty of heavens and earth, He causes life and death. You have none besides God as a supporter or victor.
God has pardoned the prophet and the emigrants and the supporters that followed him in the darkest moment, even though the hearts of some of them nearly deviated, but then He pardoned them. He is towards them Kind, Compassionate.
Also upon the three who were left behind until the land, as vast as it is, became strained to them, and their very selves became strained; they thought there is no shelter from God except to Him. Then He pardoned them that they might repent. God is the Redeemer, the Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, be aware of God and be with the truthful.
It is not advisable for the city dwellers and those around them of the Arabs that they should lag behind after God's messenger, nor should they yearn for themselves above him. That is because any thirst, fatigue, or hunger that afflicts them in the cause of God, or any step that they take which will annoy the ingrates, or any gain they have over any enemy; it will be recorded as a good deed for them. God does not waste the reward of the good doers.
Anything small or large they spend, or any valley they cross, it will be recorded for them. God will recompense them with the best of what they did.
It is not advisable for those who acknowledge to march out in their entirety. For every battalion that marches out, let a group remain to study the system, and warn their people when they return to them, perhaps they will be cautious.
O you who acknowledge, fight the ingrates who gird you about, and let them find strength in you; know that God is with the righteous.
When a chapter is revealed, some of them say, "Whose acknowledgement has this increased?" For those who acknowledge, it increased their acknowledgment, and they rejoice.*
As for those who have a disease in their hearts, it only increased foulness to their foulness, and they died as ingrates.
Do they not see they are tested every calendar year once or twice? Yet, they do not repent, nor do they take heed.
When a chapter is revealed, they looked at one another: "Does anyone see you?", then they turn away. God turns away their hearts, for they are a people who do not comprehend.*


A1L30R200. These are the signs of the book of wisdom.*
Is it a surprise for the people that We would inspire a man from amongst them: "Warn people and give good news to those who acknowledge, that they will have a footing of truth with their Lord." The ingrates said, "Evidently, this is a magician!"
Your Lord is God who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He settled over the throne; He handles all affairs. There is no intercessor except after His leave. Such is God your Lord, so serve Him. Would you not take heed?
To Him is your return, all of you, for God's promise is true. He initiates the creation then He repeats it to recompense with justice those who acknowledged and did good work. As for those who rejected, they will have a boiling drink, and a painful retribution for what they had rejected.
He is the One who made the sun an illuminator, and the moon a light, and He measured its phases so that you would know the number of the years and the calculation. God has not created this except for truth. He details the signs for a people who know.
In the alternation of night and day and what God has created in heavens and earth are signs for a people who are aware.
As for those who do not wish to meet Us, while pleased and content with the worldly life, they are unaware of Our signs.
To these will be the destiny of the fire for what they earned.
Those who acknowledge and do good work, their Lord will guide them by their acknowledgment. Rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of paradise.
Their prayer in it is: "Glory be to our god!" and their greeting in it is: "Peace," and the end of their prayer is: "Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds!"
If God were to hasten for people the evil as they desire the hastening of good for them, then they would have been ruined. We thus leave those who do not wish to meet Us wandering in their transgression.
If any adversity inflicts people, then he calls upon Us on his side or sitting or standing. But when We remove his adversity from him, he goes on as if he never implored Us because of an adversity afflicted him! Thus the works of the transgressors are adorned for them.
We have destroyed the generations before you when they transgressed, and their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they were not to acknowledge. It is such that We will recompense the criminal people.
Then We made you successors on earth after them to see how you would perform.
When Our clear signs are recited to them, those who do not wish to meet Us said, "Bring a Quran other than this, or change it!" Say, "It is not for me to change it from my own accord, I merely follow what is inspired to me. I fear if I disobey my Lord the retribution of a great day!"
Say, "Had God wished, I would not have recited it to you, nor would you have known about it. I have been residing amongst you a lifetime before this; do you not reason?"
Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God or denies His signs? The criminals will never succeed.
They serve besides God what does not harm them or benefit them, and they say, "These are our intercessors with God." Say, "Are you informing God of what He does not know in the heavens or in the earth?" Be He glorified and high from what they set up.
The people were but one nation, and then they differed. Had it not been for a previous command from your Lord, the matter would have been immediately judged between them for what they differed.
They say, "If only a sign was sent down to him from His Lord." Say, "The future is with God, so wait, and I will wait with you."*
When We let the people taste a mercy after some harm had afflicted them, they take to scheming against Our signs! Say, "God is faster in scheming;" Our messengers record what you scheme.
He is the One who carries you on land and on the sea. When you are on the ships and We drive them with a good wind which they rejoice with, a strong gust comes to it and the waves come to them from all sides, and they suppose that they are overwhelmed, they implore God devoting the system to Him: "If You save us from this, we will be of the thankful."*
But when He saves them, they then traverse through the land with injustice. O people, your rebellion is only against yourselves. What you seek out is only the consumption of this worldly life, then to Us is your return and We will inform you of all that you had done.
The example of the worldly life is like water which has come down from the sky; it mixed with the plants of the earth from what people and the livestock eat. Then the earth takes its attractions and becomes glamorous, and its inhabitants think that they have mastered it. Then Our judgment comes by night or by day, so We make it a wasteland as if it never prospered yesterday! It is such that We clarify the signs to a people who think.*
God calls to the abode of peace, and He guides those whom He wishes to a Straight Path.
For those who do good work will be good and more, and their faces will not be darkened or humiliated. These are the people of paradise, in it they will abide.
As for those who earn evil, the recompense of evil will be evil like it, and they will be humiliated. They do not have any besides God as a protector. It is as if their faces have been covered by a piece of darkness from the night. These are the people of the fire, in it they will abide.
On the day We gather them all, We will say to those who have set up partners: "Take your place, you and your partners," then We separate between them, and their partners will say, "It was not us that you served."*
"God is sufficient as a witness between us and you, we were unaware of your serving of us."
Then and there every person will know what it has done, and they are returned to God their true patron, and what they had invented has left them.*
Say, "Who provides for you from the sky and the land? Who possesses the hearing and the eyesight? Who brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living? Who controls all affairs?" They will say, "God." Say, "Why then you do not show awareness!"
Such is God, your true Lord. So what is after the truth except straying! How then you are turned away!
It was thus that your Lord's command came against those who were wicked, for they do not acknowledge.
Say, "Are there any from those whom you have set up as partners who can initiate the creation and then return it?" Say, "God initiates the creation and then returns it." How are you deluded!
Say, "Are there any of those whom you set up as partners who can guide to the truth?" Say, "God guides to the truth. Is He who guides to the truth more worthy of being followed, or the one who does not guide except after he is guided? What is wrong with you, how do you judge?"*
Most of them only follow conjecture. While conjecture does not avail against the truth in anything. God is knower of what they do.
This Quran could not have been produced without God, but it is to authenticate what is already present, and to provide detail to the book in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds.
Or do they say he invented it? Say, "Then bring a chapter like it, and call upon whoever you can besides God if you are truthful!"*
No, they have lied about the things they did not have comprehensive knowledge of, and before its explanation came to them. Similarly, those before them denied, so see what the retribution of the wicked was!
Some of them acknowledge it, and some of them do not acknowledge it. Your Lord best knows the corrupters.
If they deny you, then say, "My works are for me, and your works are for you. You are innocent from what I do, and I am innocent from what you do."
Among them are some who listen to you; but can you make the deaf hear, if they do not reason?
Among them are some who look at you; but can you guide the blind, even though they will not see?
God does not wrong the people in the least, but it is the people who wrong themselves.
The day We gather them, it will be as if they have slept for only a moment of a day. They will get to know one another. Losers are those who denied meeting God, and they were not guided.
Whether We show you some of what We promise them, or We let you pass away, then to Us is their return and God is witness over what they do.
For every nation is a messenger; so when their messenger comes, the matter is decreed between them with justice, and they are not wronged.*
They say, "When is this promise, if you are truthful?"
Say, "I do not posses for myself any harm or benefit except what God wills. For every nation is a time. When their time comes, they cannot delay it one moment nor advance it."
Say, "Do you see if His retribution will come to you by night or by day, then which portion would the criminals hasten in?"
"When it occurs, would you then acknowledge it? While now you are hastening it on!"
Then it will be said to the wicked: "Taste the everlasting retribution. You are only recompensed for what you have earned!"
They seek news from you: "Is it true?" Say, "Yes, by my Lord it is true, and you cannot escape from it."
If every person that wronged had possessed all that is on earth, it would have attempted to ransom it. They declared their regret when they saw the retribution, and it was judged between them with fairness. They are not wronged.
To God is what is in the heavens and the earth. God's promise is true, but most of them do not know.
He causes life, and He causes death, and to Him you will return.
O people, advice has come to you from your Lord and a remedy for what is in the chests, and a guidance and mercy for those who acknowledge.*
Say, "By God's grace and His mercy." For that let them rejoice, that is better than all that they gather.
Say, "Have you seen what God has sent down to you from provisions, then you made some of it forbidden and some lawful?" Say, "Did God authorize you, or did you invent lies against God?"*
What will those who invent lies against God think on the day of Resurrection? God is with great bounty to people, but most of them are not thankful.
You do not engage in any business, nor do you recite any from the Quran, nor do you do any work; without us being witnesses over you when you undertake it. Nothing is hidden from your Lord, not even an atoms weight on earth or in the heavens, nor smaller than that nor larger, but is in a clear book.
Indeed, for God's allies, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve;*
Those who acknowledged and were aware.
For them are glad tidings in the worldly life and in the Hereafter. There is no changing the words of God. Such is the supreme success.
Do not be saddened by their statements, for all glory is to God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
Certainly, to God belongs all who are in the heavens and those who are on earth. As for those who call on partners besides God, they only follow conjecture, and they only guess.
He is the One who made the night for you to reside in, and the day to see. In that are signs for a people who listen.
They said, "God has taken a son." Be He glorified! He is the Rich. To Him is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Do you have proof for this? Or do you say about God what you do not know?
Say, "Those who invent lies about God, they will not be successful."
A short pleasure in this world Then to Us is their return and We will make them taste the severe retribution for what they were rejecting.
Recite for them the news of Noah as he said to his people: "My people, if my position has become too troublesome for you, and my reminding you of God's signs, then in God I place my trust. So, gather your action and your partners together, then make certain your action does not cause you regret, then come to judge me, and do not hold back."
"But if you turn away, then I have not asked you for any reward, for my reward is with God. I have been commanded to be of those who have peacefully surrendered."
They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ship, and We made them to succeed each other, and We drowned those who denied Our signs. So see how the punishment of those who were warned was!
Then, We sent messengers after him to their own people, so they came to them with proofs. But they did not want to acknowledge what they had already denied beforehand. It is such that We stamp on the hearts of the transgressors.
Then, We sent Moses and Aaron after them with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leaders, but they turned arrogant, they were a criminal people.
So when the truth came to them from Us, they said, "This is clearly magic!"
Moses said, "Would you say this about the truth when it came to you? Is this magic? The magicians will not be successful."
They said, "Have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers upon, and so that you two would have greatness in the land? We will not acknowledge you."
Pharaoh said, "Bring me every knowledgeable magician."
When the magicians came, Moses said to them: "Cast what you will cast."
So when they cast, Moses said, "What you have brought is magic, God will falsify it. God does not set right the work of the corrupters."*
"So that God will verify the truth with His words, even if the criminals dislike it."
Because of their fear from Pharaoh and his leaders that he would persecute them, none acknowledged Moses from his people except some of their descendants. Pharaoh was high in the land, and he was of the tyrants.*
Moses said, "O my people, if you acknowledge God, then put your trust in Him if you have peacefully surrendered."
They said, "In God we put our trust. Our Lord, do not make us a test for the wicked people."
"Save us by Your mercy from the rejecting people."
We inspired to Moses and his brother: "Let your people leave their homes in Egypt, and let these homes be your focal point and hold the contact prayer. Give good news to those who acknowledge."
Moses said, "Our Lord, you have given Pharaoh and his chiefs adornments and wealth in this worldly life so that they will misguide from Your path. Our Lord, wipe-out their wealth and bring grief to their hearts so that they will not acknowledge until they see the painful retribution."*
He said, "The prayer of both of you has been accepted, so keep straight and do not follow the path of those who do not know."
We helped the Children of Israel cross the sea, and Pharaoh and his soldiers followed them out of hatred and animosity. But when drowning overtook him, he said, "I acknowledge that there is no god except the One in whom the Children of Israel acknowledge, and I am of those who have peacefully surrendered."
Right now? But before you disobeyed and were of the corrupters!
This day, We will preserve your body, so that you become a sign for those after you. But many people are oblivious to Our signs!*
We helped the Children of Israel reach a place of sanctity, and We provided them from the good things, and they did not differ until the knowledge came to them. Your Lord will judge between them on the day of Resurrection for what they differed in.
If you are in doubt regarding what We have sent down to you, then ask those who have been studying the book from before you. The truth has come to you from your Lord, so do not be of those who doubt.
Do not be of those who denied God's signs, for you will be of the losers.
Those who have deserved your Lord's retribution do not acknowledge,
Even if every sign were to come to them; until they see the painful retribution.
Why was there not a single town that benefited from its acknowledgement, with the exception of the people of Jonah? When they acknowledged, We removed from them the retribution of disgrace in this worldly life, and We let them enjoy until a time.
Had your Lord willed, all the people on earth in their entirety would have acknowledged. Would you force the people to make them acknowledge?*
It is not for a person to acknowledge except by God's leave. He casts the affliction upon those who do not reason.
Say, "Look at all that is in the heavens and the earth." But what good are the signs and warnings to a people who do not acknowledge?
Are they waiting for the days like those who passed away before them? Say, "Wait, for I am with you waiting."
Then We will save Our messengers and those who acknowledge. It is thus binding upon Us that We save those who acknowledge.
Say, "O people, if you are in doubt of my system, then I do not serve those that you serve besides God. But I serve God who terminates you, and I have been commanded to be of those who acknowledge."
Set your direction to the system of monotheism, and do not be of those who set up partners.
Do not call upon other than God what does not benefit you or harm you; if you do, then you are of the wicked.
If God afflicts you with any harm, then none can remove it except Him; and if He wanted good for you, then none can turn away His grace. He bestows it to whom He wishes of His servants. He is the Forgiver, the Compassionate.
Say, "O people, the truth has come to you from your Lord, so whosoever is guided is guided for himself, and whosoever is misguided is misguided against himself. I am not a caretaker over you."
Therefore, follow what is being inspired to you and be patient until God judges. He is the best of judges.
A1L30R200. A book whose signs have been ascertained, then detailed, from One who is Wise, Ever-aware.*
"That you shall serve none other than God. I am to you from Him a warner and a bearer of good news."
"Seek forgiveness from your Lord, then repent to Him; He will make you enjoy an enjoyment until a predetermined period. He gives His grace to those who are of grace. If you turn away, then I do fear for you the retribution of a great day!"
"To God is your return, and He is capable of all things."
Alas, they folded their chests to hide from Him. Even when they hide themselves under their outer garments, He knows what they keep secret and what they declare. He is the knower of all that is in the chests.*
There is not a creature on earth except that its provision is due from God. He knows their habitat and their depository. All is in a clear record.*
He is the One who created the heavens and earth in six days, and His dominion was upon the water, and to test who from amongst you works the best. When you say, "You will be resurrected after death." those who rejected will say, "This is but clear magic!"*
If We delay for them the retribution to a near period, they will say, "What has kept it?" Alas, on the day it comes to them, nothing will turn it away from them, and what they used to mock will catch up with them.
If We give the human being a taste of mercy from Us, then We withdraw it from him; he becomes despairing, rejecting.
If We give him the taste of a blessing after hardship had afflicted him, he will say, "Evil has gone from me!" he becomes happy, boastful;
Except for those who are steadfast and do good work; these will have a pardon, and a great reward.
So perhaps you wish to ignore some of what has been inspired to you, and you are depressed by it, because they say, "If only a treasure was sent down with him, or an angel had come with him!" You are but a warner, and God is caretaker over all things.
Or do they say, "He invented it!" Say, "Bring ten invented chapters like it, and call on whom you can besides God if you are truthful."*
If they do not respond to you, then know that it was sent down with God's knowledge, and that there is no god but He. Will you then peacefully surrender?
Whoever wants the worldly life and its adornments, then We will grant them their works in it, and they will not be short changed in it.
These will have nothing but fire in the Hereafter, and what they have done will be in vain, and evil is what they have worked.
As for those who are on a proof from their Lord, and are followed by a testimony from Him; and before it was the book of Moses as a guide and a mercy; they will acknowledge it. Whoever rejects it from amongst the parties, then the fire is his meeting place. So do not be in any doubt about it. It is the truth from your Lord, but most people do not acknowledge.*
Who is more wicked than one who invents lies about God? They will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, "These are the ones who lied about their Lord." Alas, God's curse will be upon the wicked.
Those who repel others from the path of God and seek to twist it; and regarding the Hereafter they are in denial.
These are the ones who will not escape on earth, nor do they have besides God any allies. The retribution will be doubled for them. They were not able to hear, nor could they see.
They are the ones who lost their selves, and what they had invented has abandoned them.
There is no doubt, that in the Hereafter they are the greatest losers.
Those who acknowledge and do good works, and are humble towards their Lord; they are the dwellers of paradise, in it they will remain.
The example of the two groups is like the blind and deaf, the seer and hearer. Are they equal when compared? Do you not take heed?
We had sent Noah to his people: "I am to you a clear warner!"
"Do not serve except God. I fear for you the retribution of a painful day."
The leaders who rejected from amongst his people said, "We do not see you except as a human like us, and we see that only the lowest amongst our people with shallow opinion have followed you. We do not see anything that makes you better than us; in fact, we think you are liars."
He said, "My people, do you not see that I have proof from my Lord and He gave me mercy from Himself, but you are blinded to it? Shall we compel you to it while you are averse to it?"
"My people, I do not ask you for money, my reward is with God. Nor will I turn away those who acknowledge, for they will meet their Lord. But I see that you are a people who are ignorant."
"My people, who will give me victory against God if I turn them away? Will you not reflect?"
"Nor do I say to you that I have the treasures of God, nor do I know the future, nor do I say that I am an angel, nor do I say to those whom your eyes look down upon that God will not grant them any good. God is more aware of what is in them; in such case I would be among the wicked."
They said, "O Noah, you have argued with us, and continued arguing with us, so bring us what you promise us if you are of the truthful ones."
He said, "It is God who will bring it to you if He wishes; you will not have any escape."
"My advice will not benefit you if I wanted to advise you and God wanted that you should stray. He is your Lord, and to Him you will return."
Or do they say, "He invented it?" Say, "If I invented it, then I am responsible for my crime, and I am innocent from your crimes"
It was inspired to Noah: "No more of your people will acknowledge except those who have already acknowledged. So do not be saddened by what they have done."
"Construct the Ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration, and do not speak to Me regarding those who are wicked. They will be drowned."
As he was constructing the Ship, every time any cluster from his people passed by, they mocked him. He said, "If you mock us, then we also mock you as you mock."
"You will know to whom the retribution will come to disgrace him, and upon him will be a lasting punishment."
So, when Our command came and the volcano erupted. We said, "Carry in it two from every pair, and your family; except those against whom the word has been issued; and whoever acknowledged." But those who acknowledged with him were few.*
He said, "Climb inside, in the name of God shall be its sailing and its anchorage. My Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate."
While it was running with them in waves like mountains, Noah called to his son, who was in an isolated place: "My son, ride with us, and do not be with the ingrates!"
He said, "I will take refuge to the mountain which will save me from the water." He said, "There is no savior from God's decree except to whom He grants mercy." The wave came between them, so he was one of those who drowned.
It was said, "O land, swallow your water, and O sky, cease." The water was diminished, and the matter concluded. It came to rest on the Judea, and it was said, "Away with the wicked people."
Noah called on his Lord, and he said, "My Lord, my son is from my family, and your promise is the truth, and you are the Wisest of all Judges."
He said, "O Noah, he is not from your family, he committed sin, so do not ask what you have no knowledge of. I advise you not to be of the ignorant."*
He said, "My Lord, I seek refuge with You that I would ask You what I did not have knowledge of. If You do not forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be of the losers!"
It was said, "O Noah, descend in peace from Us and blessings upon you and upon nations to come from those with you; and nations whom We will grant pleasure, then a painful retribution will reach them from Us."
This is from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. Neither did you nor your people know this, so be patient. The ending is always in favor of the righteous.
To Aad was sent their brother Hud. He said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him; you are simply conjecturing."
"My people, I do not ask you for any wage, my wage is from the One who initiated me. Will you not reason?"
"My people, seek forgiveness from your Lord, then repent to Him; He will send the sky to you abundantly, and He will increase might to your might. So do not turn away as criminals."
They said, "O Hud, you have not come to us with any proof, nor will we leave our gods based on what you say. We will not acknowledge you."
"All we can say is that perhaps some of our gods have possessed you with evil." He said, "I make God my witness, and all of you witness that I disown what you have set up as partners--
"-- besides Him, so scheme against me all of you, then do not give me respite."
"I have put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is not a creature except He will seize it by its frontal lobe. My Lord is on a Straight Path."
"If you turn away, then I have delivered what I was sent to you with. My Lord will bring after you a people who are not like you, and you will not harm Him in the least. My Lord is Guardian over all things."
When Our command came, We saved Hood and those who acknowledged with him by a mercy from Us, and We saved them from a harsh retribution.
Such was the case of Aad. They disregarded the signs of their Lord, and they disobeyed His messengers, and they followed the lead of everyone powerful and stubborn.
They were followed by a curse in this world and on the day of judgment, for Aad rejected their Lord. There is no more Aad, the people of Hud.
To Thamud was sent their brother Saleh. He said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. He established you in the land and gave you control over it, so seek His forgiveness, then repent to Him. My Lord is Near, Responsive."
They said, "O Saleh, you were well liked amongst us before this. Do you deter us from serving what our fathers served? We are in serious doubt as to what you are inviting us."
He said, "My people, what do you think if I was on clear evidence from my Lord, and He gave me from Him a mercy. Who would then support me against God if I disobey Him? You would only increase me in loss!"
"My people, this is God's camel, in her you have a sign. So leave her to eat from God's land freely, and do not harm her, or else a close retribution will take you."
But they slaughtered her. So he said, "You will only have three days of enjoyment in your homes. This is a promise that will not be denied."
So, when Our command came, We saved Saleh and those who acknowledged with him by a mercy from Us against the disgrace of that day. Your Lord is the Powerful, the Noble.
Those who wronged were taken by the scream, thus they lay motionless in their homes.
It is as if they never lived there. For Thamud rejected their Lord. There is no more Thamud.
Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they said, "Peace" He said, "Peace," and it was not long before he came back with a roasted calf.
But when he saw that their hands did not go towards it, he mistrusted them, and felt a fear of them. They said, "Have no fear, we have been sent to the people of Lot."
His wife was standing, so she laughed when We gave her good news of Isaac, and after Isaac, Jacob.
She said, "O my! how can I give birth while I am an old woman, and here is my husband an old man? This is indeed a strange thing!"
They said, "Do you wonder at the decree of God? God's Compassion and Blessings are upon you O people of the sanctuary. He is Praiseworthy, Glorious."
So when the shock left Abraham, and the good news was delivered to him, he began to argue with Us for the people of Lot.
Abraham was compassionate, kind.
O Abraham, turn away from this. Your Lord's command has come, and a retribution that will not be turned back is coming for them.
When Our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved on their account and he felt discomfort for them and said, "This is a distressful day."
His people came rushing towards him, and were accustomed to committing sin. He said, "My people, these are my daughters, they are purer for you, so be aware of God and do not disgrace me regarding my guests. Is there no reasonable man among you?"
They said, "You know we have no interest in your daughters, and you are aware of what we want!"*
He said, "If only I had strength against you, or I could find for myself some powerful support."
They said, "O Lot, we are your Lord's messengers; they will not be able to harm you. So travel with your family during the cover of the night and let not any of you look back except for your wife; she will be afflicted with what they will be afflicted. Their appointed time will be the morning. Is the morning not near?"
So when Our command came, We turned it upside down, and We rained on it with hardened fiery projectiles.
Marked from your Lord, and they are never far from the wicked.
To Midian was their brother Shuayb, he said, "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him, and do not give short in the measure and weight. I see you in prosperity, and I fear for you the retribution of a day that is surrounding."
"My people, give full measure and weight with justice, do not hold back from the people what is theirs, and do not roam the land corrupting."
"What will remain for you with God is far better if you are those who acknowledge. I am not a guardian over you."
They said, "O Shuayb, does your contact prayer order you that we leave what our fathers served, or that we do not do with our money as we please? You are the compassionate, the sane!"*
He said, "O my people, do you see that if I am on clear evidence from my Lord, and He has provided me with good provision from Him, then I would not want to contradict by doing what I forbid you from. I only want to fix what I can, and my guidance is only with God. To Him I place my trust, and to Him I repent."
"My people, let not your hatred towards me incriminate you that you suffer the fate of what afflicted the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Saleh; and the people of Lot were not far off from you."
"Seek forgiveness from your Lord then repent to Him. My Lord is Compassionate, Loving."
They said, "O Shuayb, we do not understand most of what you say, and we see you as weak amongst us. If it were not for who your family is, we would have stoned/rejected you, and you would not be proud against us."
He said, "My people, is my family more important to you than God, while you have cast Him away behind your backs? My Lord is Encompassing over what you do."
"My people, continue to act as you do, and I will act. You will then come to know to whom the humiliating retribution will come and who is the liar. Watch then, and I will watch with you."
When Our command came, We saved Shuayb and those who acknowledged with him by a mercy from Us; and the scream took those who had wronged, so they lay motionless in their homes.
It is as if they never lived there. Away with Midian as it was away with Thamud.
We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority.
To Pharaoh and his leaders; but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh's command was not wise.
He will be at the head of his people on the day of Resurrection, and he will lead them to the fire. What a miserable place they are lead in!
They were followed by a curse in this, and on the day of Resurrection. What a miserable path to follow!
That is from the news of the towns which We relate to you; some are still standing and some have been wiped-out.
We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves. Their gods that they called on besides God did not rescue them at all when your Lord's command came, and they only added to their destruction.
Such is the taking of your Lord when He takes the towns while they are wicked. His taking is painful, severe.
In this is a sign for he who fears the retribution of the Hereafter. That is a day to which all the people will be gathered, and that is a day which will witnessed.
We do not delay it except to a term already prepared for.
On the day it comes, no person will speak to another except by His leave. Some of them will be distraught, some will be happy.
As for those who are distraught, they will be in the fire; in it for them is a sighing and a wailing.
They will abide in it as long as the heavens and earth exist, except for what your Lord wishes. Your Lord does as He pleases.
As for those who are fortunate, they will be in paradise; in it they will abide as long as the heavens and earth exist, except for what your Lord wishes, a giving without end.*
So do not be in doubt as to what these men serve. They serve nothing but what their fathers before them served. We will give them their recompense in full.
We have given Moses the book, yet they disputed in it; and had it not been for a word which was already given by your Lord, their case would have been judged immediately. They are in grave doubt concerning it.
To each your Lord will recompense their works. He is Ever-aware in what they do.
So stand straight as you were commanded together with those who repented with you and do not transgress. He is watcher over what you do.
You shall not lean towards those who have wronged, else you will incur the fire; and you will not have besides God any allies, and you will not be victorious.
You shall hold the contact prayer at both ends of the day and the near part of the night. The good deeds take away the bad. This is a reminder for those who remember.*
Be patient, for God does not waste the reward of the good doers.
If only there was from the previous generations a people with wisdom who deterred from the corruption on earth, except the few that We saved of them. Those who were wicked followed the enjoyment they were in, and they were criminal.
Your Lord would not destroy the towns wrongfully, while its people were good doers.
Had your Lord wished, He could have made all the people one nation, but they still would continue to disagree;
Except whom your Lord has mercy upon; and for that He has created them. The word of your Lord came true: "I will fill hell with the Jinn and the humans together!"*
All the news of the messengers that we relate to you is to strengthen your heart. In this has come to you the truth and a lesson and a reminder for those who acknowledge.
Say to those who do not acknowledge: "Continue to do what you will, we will also do.
"Wait, for we are also waiting."
To God is the unseen of heavens and earth, and to Him all matters return. So serve Him and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you all do.
A1L30R200. These are the signs of the clarifying book.*
We have sent it down an Arabic Quran/recitation, perhaps you will reason.
We relate to you the best stories through what We have inspired to you in this Quran; and before it you were of those who were unaware.
When Joseph said to his father: "My father, I have seen eleven planets and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating before me."*
He said, "O my son, do not relate your dream to your brothers, or they will scheme against you. The devil is to human being a clear enemy."
As such, your Lord has chosen you, and He teaches you the interpretation of dreams, and He completes His blessings upon you and upon the descendants of Jacob, as He completed it for your fathers before that, Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is Omniscient, Wise.*
It is thus that in Joseph and his brothers are signs for those who seek.
For they said, "Joseph and his brother are more loved by our father than us, while we are a gang. Our father is clearly misguided."
"Kill Joseph or cast him in the land, then your father's favor will be all yours, and after that you will be a reformed people."
One amongst them said, "Do not kill Joseph, but if you are going to do anything, then cast him into the bottom of the well, so that anyone traveling by will pick him up."
They said, "Our father, why do you not trust us with Joseph, we are to him well wishers."
"Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy and play, and we will take care of him."
He said, "It saddens me that you should take him, and I fear that the wolf would eat him if you would be absent from him."
They said, "If the wolf eats him, while we are a gang, then we are the losers."
So, when they went with him they had agreed to place him at the bottom of the well. We inspired him: "You will inform them of this act of theirs while they will not expect it."*
They came to their father at dusk crying.
They said, "Our father, we went to race and left Joseph by our things, and the wolf ate him! But you would not trust us even if we are truthful."
They came with his shirt stained in false blood. He said, "You have invented this tale yourselves. Patience is good, and God's help is sought against what you describe."
A traveling caravan came and they sent their water-drawer. When he let down his bucket he said, "Good news, there is a boy!" So they hid him as merchandise. God knows what they do.
They sold him for a low price, a few silver coins, and they regarded him as insignificant.
The one from Egypt who bought him said to his wife: "Make his stay generous, perhaps he will benefit us or we may take him as a son." It was thus that We established Joseph in the land and to teach him the interpretation of dreams. God has full power over matters, but most of the people do not know.*
When he reached his maturity, We gave him position and knowledge. It is thus that We reward the good doers.
The woman, in whose house he was staying, attempted to seduce him away from himself. She closed the doors and said, "I have prepared myself for you." He said, "I seek refuge with God, He is my Lord, He made good my residence; the wicked do not succeed."*
She desired him and he desired her, had it not been that he saw His Lord's manifest evidence; thus We turned evil and lewdness away from him, as one of Our loyal servants.
As they rushed towards the door, she tore his shirt from behind; and they found her noble husband at the door. She said, "What is the punishment of he who wanted to molest your family? Is it not that he be jailed or punished painfully?"
He said, "She is the one who seduced me from myself," and a witness from her family gave testimony: "If his shirt was torn from the front, then she is truthful, and he is the liar."*
"If his shirt is torn from behind, then she is lying, and he is truthful."
So when he saw that his shirt was torn from behind, he said, "This is from your female scheming, your female scheming is indeed great!"
"Joseph, turn away from this. You woman, seek forgiveness for your sin; you were of the wrongdoers."
Some women in the city said, "The wife of the Governor is trying to seduce her young man from himself; she is taken by love. We see her clearly misguided."
So when she heard of their scheming, she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them, and she gave each one of them a knife. She said, "Come out to them," so when they saw him they exalted him and cut their hands, and they said, "God be praised, this is not a human, but a blessed angel!"*
She said, "This is the one whom you blamed me for, and I have seduced him from himself but he refused. If he does not do as I command him, he will be imprisoned, and he will be one of those disgraced."
He said, "My Lord, prison is better to me than what they are inviting me to do. If You do not turn their scheming away from me, I will fall for them and be of the ignorant."
So his Lord responded to him, and He turned away their scheming from him. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
But it appealed to them, even after they had seen the signs, to imprison him until a time.
With him in the prison entered two young men. One of them said, "I dreamt that I was pressing wine," and the other said, "I dreamt that I was carrying bread on top of my head, and that the birds were eating from it." "Tell us what this means, for we see that you are of the good doers."
He said, "There is not any provision of food that will come to you except that I will tell you of its interpretation before it comes. That is from what my Lord has taught me. I have just left the creed of a people who do not acknowledge God, and they are rejecting the Hereafter."
"I followed the creed of my fathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It was not for us to set up partners with God at all. That is God's blessings over us and over the people, but most of the people are not thankful."
"O my fellow inmates, are various lords better, or God, the One, the Omniscient?"*
"What you serve besides Him are nothing but names which you have fabricated you and your fathers. God did not send down any authority for such. The judgment is for none but God. He ordered that none be served but He. That is the true system, but most of the people do not know."
"My fellow inmates, one of you will be serving wine for his lord, while the other will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his head. The matter which you have sought is now concluded."
He said to the one whom he thought would be saved of them: "Mention me to your lord." But the devil made him forget to mention to his lord, so He remained in prison for a few years.*
The King said, "I continue to dream of seven fat cows which are being eaten by seven thin ones, and seven green pods and others which are dry. O you chiefs, tell me what my vision means if you are able to interpret the visions."*
They said, "It is nothing but medley dreams; and we are not knowledgeable in the interpretation of dreams."
The one of them who had been saved and remembered after all this time said, "I will tell you of its interpretation, so send me forth."
"Joseph, O truth one, explain to us the matter regarding seven fat cows being eaten by seven thin ones, and seven green pods and others which are dry? Then perhaps I may go back to the people so they will know."
He said, "You will plant regularly for seven years, and whatever you harvest you must leave it in its pods, except for the little that you will eat."
"Then after that will come seven ones severe in drought, which will consume all that you planted except for what you have stored."
"Then after that will come a calendar year in which the people will have abundant rain and which they will be able to produce once again."
The King said, "Bring him to me." When the messenger came to him, he said, "Go back to your lord and ask him what the matter was regarding the women that cut their hands? My Lord is well aware of their scheming."
He said, "What is your plea that you tried to seduce Joseph from himself?" They said, "God forbid that we would do any harm to him." The wife of the Governor said, "Now the truth must be known, I did seek to seduce Joseph from himself and he is of the truthful ones"
"That is so he knows that I will not betray him while he is not present and that God does not guide the scheming of the betrayers."
"I do not make myself free of blame, for the person is inclined to sin, except what my Lord has mercy on. My Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate."
The King said, "Bring him to me so that I may employ him for myself." So when he spoke to him, he said, "Today you are with us in high rank and trusted."
He said, "Make me keeper over the granaries of the land, for I know how to keep records and I am knowledgeable."
Thus, We gave Joseph authority in the land, to travel in it as he pleases. We bestow Our mercy upon whom We please, and We do not waste the reward of the good doers.
The reward of the Hereafter is better for those who acknowledge and were aware.
Joseph's brothers came and entered upon him, and he recognized them, but they did not recognize him.
So, when he furnished them with their provisions, he said, "Bring me a step-brother of yours who is from your father. Do you not see that I give full measure of grain and that I am the best of hosts?"*
"But if you do not bring him to me, then there shall be no measure of grain for you with me, and do not come near me."
They said, "We will try to get him away from his father, and we shall do it."
He said to his servants: "Return their goods back into their bags, so that they will recognize it when they return to their family and they will come back again."
So when they returned to their father, they said, "Our father, we have been banned from getting anymore measure of grain, so send our brother with us so we may be given a measure of grain, and we will be his guardians."
He said, "Shall I trust him with you as I trusted you with Joseph before that? God is the best guardian, and He is the Most Compassionate of those who show compassion."
So when they opened their bags, they found their goods had been returned to them, and they said, "Our father, what more can we desire, this is our goods returned to us, so we can get more for our family, and be guardians over our brother, and increase a measure of grain to load a camel. That is truly an easy measure!"
He said, "I will not send him with you until you give me a covenant before God that you will bring him back unless you are completely overtaken." So when they gave him their covenant, he said, "God is a guard over what we say."
He said, "My sons, do not enter from one gate, but enter from separate gates; and I cannot avail you anything against God, for the judgment is to God. In Him I put my trust, and in Him those who put their trust should trust."
When they entered from where their father had commanded them, it would not have availed them in the least against God, but it was out of a concern in Jacob's person. Since We have taught him, he had certain knowledge; but most people do not know.*
When they entered upon Joseph, he called his brother to himself and said, "I am your brother, so do not be saddened by what they have done."
When he furnished them with their provisions, he placed the measuring bowl in his brother's bag. Then a caller cried out: "O you in the caravan, you are thieves!"
They said, turning towards them: "What is it you are missing?"
He said, "We are missing the measuring bowl of the King, and whoever finds it shall receive a camel-load; I guarantee this."
They said, "By God, you know we did not come to cause corruption in the land, and we are no thieves!"
He said, "What shall be the punishment, if you are not truthful?"
They said, "The punishment is that the person who has it in his bag shall himself be held as penalty. It is such that we punish the wicked."
So he began with their bags before his brother's bag. Then he brought it out of his brother's bag. It was such that We planned for Joseph, for he would not have been able to take his brother under the King's system, except that God wished it so. We raise the degrees of whom We please, and over every one of knowledge is the All Knowledgeable.*
They said, "If he has stolen, there was a brother of his before who also had stolen." Joseph kept this all inside himself, and did not reveal anything to them. He said, "You are in a worse position, and God best knows what you describe."
They said, "O Governor, he has an elderly father, so take one of us in his place. Indeed we see you as one of the good doers."
He said, "God forbid that we would take anyone except he whom we found our belongings with. Indeed, we would then be wrong doers."
So when they gave up from him, they held a conference in private. The eldest of them said, "Did you not know that your father has taken a covenant from you before God, and the past, you also failed in your duty with Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father permits me to do so or that God will judge for me. He is the best of judges."
"Return to your father, and tell him: "Our father, your son has stolen, and we did not witness except what we learned, and we could not know the unseen!"
"Ask the people of the town which we were in, and the caravan which we have returned with. We are being truthful."
He replied: "No, you lured yourself to commit this work. So patience is good; perhaps God will bring them all to me. He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise."*
He turned away from them and said, "Oh, my grief over Joseph." His eyes turned white from sadness, and he became blind.
They said, "By God, will you never cease to remember Joseph until you become ill or you are dead!"
He said, "I merely complain my grief and sorrow to God, and I know from God what you do not know."
"My sons, go and inquire about Joseph and his brother, and do not give up from God's Spirit. The only people who would give up from God's Spirit are the ingrates of acknowledgment."*
So when they entered upon him, they said, "O Governor, we have been afflicted with harm, us and our family, and we have come with poor goods to trade, so give us a measure of grain, and be charitable towards us, for God does reward the charitable."
He said, "Do you know what you have done with Joseph and his brother, during your ignorance?"
They said, "Are you indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has been gracious to us. For anyone who reveres and is patient, then God will not waste the reward of the good doers."
They said, "By God, God has indeed preferred you over us and we were wrongdoers."
He said, "There is no blame on you this day, may God forgive you, and He is the most Compassionate of those who show compassion."*
"Take this shirt of mine and cast it over my fathers face, and he will become with sight; and bring to me all your family."
When the caravan departed, their father said, "I do indeed feel the scent of Joseph, except that you may think me senile."
People said, "By God, you are back to your old misguidance."
Then, when the bearer of good news came, he cast it over his face and he returned clear with sight. He said, "Did I not tell you that I know from God what you do not know?"
They said, "Our father, ask forgiveness for our sins, indeed we have been wrong."
He said, "I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord, He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate."*
Then, when they entered upon Joseph, he took his parents to him and he said, "Enter Egypt, God willing, in security."
He raised his parents on the throne, and all fell in prostration before Him. He said, "My father, this is the interpretation of my old dream. My Lord has made it true, and He has been good to me that he took me out of prison and brought you out of the wilderness after the devil had placed a rift between me and my brothers. My Lord is kind to whom He wills. He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise."
"My Lord, you have given me sovereignty and taught me the interpretations of events and utterances. Initiator of the heavens and earth, you are my protector in this world and the Hereafter. Take me as one who has peacefully surrendered, and join me with the good doers."
That is from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. You were not amongst them when they arranged their plan and were scheming.
Most people will not acknowledge, even if you wish eagerly.
Though you do not ask them for a wage for it; it is but a reminder to the worlds.
How many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by, while they are turning away from it.
Most of them will not acknowledge God without setting up partners.
Are they secure against the coming of a cover of retribution from God, or that the moment would come to them suddenly while they do not perceive?
Say, "This is my way, I invite to God in full disclosure, myself and whoever follows me. Glory be to God. I am not of those who set up partners."
We have not sent before you except men, to whom We gave inspiration, from the people of the towns. Would they not roam the earth and see what the punishment of those before them was? The abode of the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware. Do you not reason?*
Then, when the messengers gave up, and they thought that they have been denied, Our victory came to them. We then save whom We wish, and Our punishment cannot be swayed from the wicked people.
In their stories is a lesson for the people of intelligence. It is not a hadith that was invented, but an authentication of what is already present, a detailing of all things, and a guidance and mercy to a people who acknowledge.*
A1L30M40R200. These are the signs of the book. What has been sent down to you from your Lord is the truth; but most of the people do not acknowledge.*
God, Who raised the skies without any pillars that you can see, then He established the authority, and He commissioned the sun and the moon; each running to a fixed destiny. He manages all affairs, and He details the signs so that you will be aware of the meeting with your Lord.
He is the One who stretched out the land, made in it stabilizers and rivers, and from every fruit He made a pair of two; the night covers the day. In that are signs for a people who will think.
On earth are neighboring pieces of land with gardens of grapes and plants and palm trees, some of which may be twins sharing the same root, or single, even though they are being watered with the same water source; and We make preference for some of them over others in what they consume. In that are signs for a people who reason.
If you wonder, then what is more wondrous is their saying: "Can it be that when we are dust, we will be created anew!" These are those who rejected their Lord, and they will have chains around their necks, and they are the dwellers of the fire, in it they will abide.
They ask you to hasten with the doom rather than the good, yet the examples of those before them have already been given. Your Lord is with great forgiveness to the people despite their transgression, and your Lord is severe in retribution.
Those who reject say, "If only a sign was sent down to him from his Lord." You are but a warner, and to every nation is a guide.
God knows what every female carries, and how short her pregnancy or how long. Everything with Him is measured.*
The knower of the unseen and the seen, the Great, the most High.
It is the same whether any of you conceals the word or openly declares it; whether he is hiding in the night or going openly in the day.
As if he has followers in his presence and behind him guarding him from God's command! God is not to change what is in a people until they change what is within themselves. If God wanted to harm a people, then there is no turning Him back, nor will they have any protector against Him.*
He is the One who shows you the lightning, giving you fear and hope. He establishes the heavy clouds.
The thunder glorifies with His praise, the angels are in awe of Him, and He sends the thunderbolts, thus striking with them whomever He wills. Yet they are still arguing regarding God, while He is severe in punishment.
To Him is the call of truth. Those who are called on besides Him, they will not respond to them in anything. It is like one who places his hands openly in the water to drink, but it never reaches his mouth. The call of the ingrates is nothing but in misguidance.
To God prostrate all who are in the heavens and the earth, willingly and unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening.*
Say, "Who is the Lord of the heavens and earth," Say, "God." Say, "Have you taken besides Him allies who do not possess for themselves any benefit or harm?" Say, "Is the blind and the seer the same? Or, does the darkness and the light equate?" Or have they made partners with God who have created like His creation, so the creations all seemed the same to them? Say, "God has created all things, and He is the One, the Supreme."
He sent down water from the sky, so valleys flowed according to their capacity, and the flood produces foam. From what they burn to smelt jewelry or goods similar foam is produced. It is in such a manner that God strikes the falsehood with the truth. As for the foam, it passes away; as for what benefits the people, it remains in the earth. It is such that God cites the examples.
For those who responded to their Lord is goodness. As for those who did not respond to Him, if they had all that is in the earth twice over, they would offer it to be saved. To these will be a terrible reckoning, and their abode is hell; what a miserable abode.
Is one who knows that the truth has been sent down to you from your Lord like one who is blind? Only those with understanding will remember.
Those who fulfill God's covenant, and they do not break the Covenant.
Those who deliver what God has ordered be delivered, and they revere their Lord and they fear the terrible reckoning.
Those who are patient seeking their Lord's direction; and they hold the contact prayer, and they spend from what We bestowed upon them secretly and openly, and they counter sin with good; these will have an excellent abode.
The gardens of Eden, they will enter it with those who are good doers from their fathers and their mates and their progeny. The angels will enter upon them from every gate:
"Peace be upon you for what you have been patient for. Excellent indeed is the final abode."
As for those who break the pledge of God after making its covenant, and they sever what God ordered that it be joined, and they corrupt in the earth; to those is a curse and they will have a miserable abode.
God extends the provisions for whom He wishes, or restricts. They celebrated the worldly life, but the worldly life compared to the Hereafter was nothing but a brief enjoyment.
Those who have rejected say, "If only a sign were sent down to him from his Lord!" Say, "God misguides whom He wishes and guides to Him whoever is repenting."
The ones who acknowledged and their hearts are satisfied by the remembrance of God; for in God's remembrance the hearts are satisfied.
Those who acknowledged, and did good works, there will be happiness for them and a good abode.
As such, We have sent you to a nation as other nations that have come before, so that you may recite for them what has been inspired to you; while they are still rejecting the Gracious. Say, "He is my Lord, there is no god but He; in Him I place my trust and to Him is my repentance."
If there were a Quran/recitation with which mountains were moved, the earth were sliced, or the dead were made to speak No, to God is all matters. Did not those who acknowledge know that if God wished He would have guided all the people? As for those who reject, until God's promise comes true, a disaster will continue to strike them or alight at near their homes because of what they do. God does not breach the appointment.
Messengers before you were ridiculed, but I gave time to those who rejected, then I took them. Then how was My punishment?
Who is the One standing over every person for what it has earned? Yet they make partners with God. Say, "Name them? Or are you informing Him of what He does not know on earth? Or is it just a show of words?" But to the ingrates, their scheming is made to appear clever, and they are turned away from the path. Whoever God misguides will have no guide.
They will have a punishment in the worldly life, and the punishment of the Hereafter is more difficult. They will have no protector against God.
The allegory of paradise that the righteous have been promised is that rivers flow beneath it, and its provisions are continuous as is its shade. Such is the abode of those who were righteous, while the abode of the ingrates is the fire.
Those to whom We have previously given the book rejoice at what has been sent down to you, but there are some of the groups that reject parts of it. Say, "I am only ordered to serve God and not to associate any partner with Him. To Him I pray and to Him is the return."
Thus, We have sent it down a law in Arabic. If you follow their desires after what has come to you of the knowledge, then you will not have any ally or protector against God.
We have sent messengers before you and We have made for them mates and offspring. It was not for a messenger to come with any sign except by God's leave, but for every time there is a decree.*
God erases what He wishes and affirms, and with Him is the source of the book.
If We show you some of what We promise them or if We let you pass away, for you is only to deliver, while for Us is the reckoning.*
Do they not see that We come to the land and reduce it from its borders? God gives judgment and there is none to override His judgment. He is quick reckoning.*
Those before them have schemed, but to God is all scheming. He knows what every person earns and the ingrates will come to know to whom is the ultimate abode.
Those who reject say, "You are not a messenger." Say, "God is sufficient as a witness between me and you, the One who has the knowledge of the book."
A1L30R200. A book which We have sent down to you so that you may take the people out of the darkness and into the light, by their Lord's leave, to the path of the Noble, the Praiseworthy.*
God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens, and all that is in the earth. Woe to the ingrates from a painful retribution.
The ones who have preferred the worldly life over the Hereafter, and they repel away from the path of God, and they seek its distortion. Those are the ones who are in misguidance.
We did not send any messenger except in the language of his people, so he may proclaim to them. But God misguides whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. He is the Noble, the Wise.*
We sent Moses with Our signs that you should bring your people out from the darkness and into the light, and remind them with God's days. In this are signs for any who are patient and thankful.
Moses said to his people: "Remember God's blessings upon you that He saved you from the people of Pharaoh. They used to inflict the worst punishment upon you, and they used to murder your children, and shame your women. In that was a great trial from your Lord."
When your Lord proclaimed: "If you give thanks, then I will increase for you, but if you turn unappreciative, then My retribution is severe."
Moses said, "If you reject, you and all who are on earth together, yet God is Rich, Praiseworthy."
Did not news come to you of those before you: the people of Noah, and Aad, and Thamud. Those after them, whom none know but God? Their messengers came to them with proof, but they placed their hands to their mouths and said, "We are rejecting what you have been sent with, and we are in grave doubt as to what you are inviting us to."
Their messengers said, "Is there doubt regarding God, the initiator of the heavens and the earth? He invites you so that He may forgive some of your sins, and grant you until a predetermined time." They said, "You are but humans like us, you wish to turn us away from what our fathers used to serve. So come to us with clear authority."
Their messengers said, "We are but humans like you, but God will bestow His grace upon whom He pleases from His servants. It is not up to us to bring you an authorization except by God's leave. In God those who acknowledge should place their trust"
"Why should we not place our trust in God, when He has guided us to our paths. We will be resolute against the harm you inflict upon us. In God those who trust should put their trust."
Those who rejected said to their messengers: "We will drive you out of our land, or you will return to our creed." It was then that their Lord inspired to them: "We will destroy the wicked."
"We will let you reside in the land after them. That is for those who fear My majesty and fear My threat."
They sought victory, and every arrogant tyrant was then failed.
From behind him is hell, and he will be served repulsive water.
He tries to drink it, but cannot swallow it, and death comes to him from everywhere, but he will not die; and after this is a powerful retribution.
The example of those who reject their Lord is that their works are like ashes, on which the wind blows strongly on a stormy day; they cannot get anything of what they earned. Such is the farthest straying.
Did you not see that God created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He wished, He would do away with you and bring a new creation.
That for God is not difficult to do.
They all appeared before God. The weak ones said to those who were arrogant: "We were following you, so will you avail us anything from God's retribution?" They said, "If God had guided us, then we would have guided you. It makes no difference if we rage or endure, for we have no refuge."
The devil said when the matter was complete: "God had promised you the promise of truth, and I promised you and broke my promise. I had no power over you except that I invited you and you responded to me. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves; I cannot help you nor can you help me. I reject that you have set me as a partner before this; the wicked will have a painful retribution."
Admission was given to those who acknowledged and did good works to gardens with rivers flowing beneath them. In them they will abide by the leave of their Lord. Their greeting therein is "Peace."
Have you not seen how God cites the example of a good word is like a good tree, whose root is firm and its branches in the sky?
It bears its fruit every so often by its Lord's leave. God cites the examples for the people, perhaps they will remember.
The example of a bad word is like a tree which has been uprooted from the surface of the earth, it has nowhere to settle.
God makes firm those who acknowledge with firm sayings in the worldly life, and in the Hereafter. God sends the wicked astray, and God does what He wishes.
Did you not see those who replaced God's blessings with rejection, and they caused their people to dwell in the abode of destruction?
Hell is where they will burn, what a miserable place to settle.
They made equals to God in order that they may divert from His path. Say, "Enjoy, for your destiny is to the fire."
Say to My servants who acknowledge, that they should hold the contact prayer, and spend from provisions We granted them, secretly and publicly, before a day comes when there is no trade therein, nor will there be any friends.
God is the One who created the heavens and the earth. He sent down water from the sky and brought out fruits as provisions for you. He committed for you the ships to run in the sea by His command, and He committed for you the rivers.
He committed for you the sun and the moon, both in continuity; and He committed for you the night and the day.
He gave you all that you have asked Him. If you were to count God's blessings, you will never enumerate them. The human is indeed transgressing, unappreciative.
When Abraham said, "My Lord, make this town a sanctuary, and keep me and my sons away from serving idols."
"My Lord, they have misguided many from amongst the people. So, whoever follows me, then he is of me, and whoever disobeys me, then You are Forgiving, Compassionate."
"My Lord, I have resided part of my progeny in an uncultivated valley near your Restricted Sanctuary. My Lord, so that they may hold the contact prayer. So let the hearts of the people incline towards them. Provide them with fruits that they may appreciate."
"Our Lord, you know what we hide and what we declare. Nothing is hidden from God in the earth nor in the heavens."
"Praise be to God who has granted me, despite my old age, Ishmael and Isaac. My Lord is the hearer of prayers."
"My Lord, let me hold the contact prayer, and also from my progeny. Our Lord, accept my prayer."
"Our Lord, forgive me and my parents, and those who acknowledge on the day the reckoning is called."
Do not think that God is unaware of what the wicked do. He is merely delaying them to a day when all eyes are watching.
They will approach with their heads bowed, their eyes will not blink, and their hearts will be void.
Warn the people of the day when the retribution will come to them, and those who were wicked will say, "Our Lord, delay this for us until a short time, and we will respond to Your call and follow the messengers!" Did you not swear before this that you would last forever?
You even resided in the homes of those who had wronged themselves, and it was made clear to you what We did to them. We had cited the examples to you.
Indeed they schemed their scheming, and their scheming was at God; though their scheming was enough to eliminate mountains.
So do not think that God will fail to keep His promise to His messengers. God is Noble, able to seek revenge.
The day the earth is replaced with another earth, as are the heavens, and they will appear before God, the One, the Irresistible.*
You will see the criminals on that day held by restraints.
Their clothes will be of tar, and the fire will overwhelm their faces.
Thus God will recompense every person what it earned. God is quick to reckoning.
This is a proclamation for the people and so that they are warned with it, and so that they know that there is but One god, and so that those with intelligence will remember.
A1L30R200 these are the signs of the book, and a clear Quran.*
Those who have rejected will often wish they were of those who peacefully surrendered!
Leave them to eat and enjoy, and let them be preoccupied with hope. They will come to know.
We have not destroyed any town except that it had an appointed time.
No nation can quicken its fate, nor can they delay.
They said, "O you upon whom the Reminder has been sent down, you are crazy."
"Why not bring us the angels if you are of the truthful ones?"
We do not send down the angels except with truth, and then they would have no more respite.
We, indeed We, it is We who have sent down the Reminder, and indeed it is We who will preserve it.*
We have sent before you to the factions of old.
Any messenger that came to them, they would mock him.
We thus let it sneak into the hearts of the criminals.
They do not acknowledge it, while the examples of the early generations has been brought to them.
If We opened for them a gate in the sky and they were to continue ascending to it,
They would have said, "Our sight has been intoxicated. No, we are a people who are being bewitched!"
We have placed towers in the heavens and We have made them pleasant to the onlookers.
We have guarded them from every outcast devil.
Except he who manages to eavesdrop, he will be pursued clearly by a flaming meteor.
As for the land, We have stretched it, placed stabilizers in it, and We have planted in it everything in balance.
We made for you in it a habitat, as well as those whom you are not required to provide for.
There is not a thing, except that We have vaults of it, yet We only send it down in a measured amount.
We have sent the winds to pollinate, and We sent down water from the sky for you to drink. It is not you who store it up.
It is indeed We who give life and death, and We are the inheritors.
Certainly We know those among you who are progressive, and We know those of you who are regressive.
It is your Lord that will gather them. He is Wise, Knowledgeable.
We have created the human being from hardened clay of aged mud.*
The Jinn, We created him before that from the flames of fire.
Your Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a human from hardened clay of aged mud."
"So when I perfect him, and blow of My Spirit in him, you shall fall prostrate to him."*
Thus, all of the angels fell prostrate to him,
Except for Satan, he refused to be with those who prostrated.
He said, "O Satan, what is the matter that you are not with the prostrators?"
He said, "I am not to prostrate to a human You have created from a hardened clay of aged mud."
He said, "Exit from here, you are cast out."
"A curse shall be upon you until the day of judgment."
He said, "My Lord, respite me until the day they are resurrected."
He said, "You are given respite,"
"Until the day of the appointed time."
He said, "My Lord, you sent me astray, I will make the earth appear beautiful for them, and I will mislead them all,"
"Except Your devoted servants."
He said, "This is a straight path to Me."
"For My servants, you shall have no authority over them, except those who are misled and follow you."
"Hell, shall be the appointed place for them all."
"It has seven gates, for every gate will be an assigned segment from them."
The righteous will be in paradises and springs.
"Enter it in peace and security."
We removed all negative feelings in their chests; they are brothers in quarters facing one another.
No fatigue shall touch them, nor will they be made to leave from it.
Inform My servants that I am the Forgiver, the Compassionate.
That My punishment is a painful retribution.
Also inform them of Abraham's guests.
That they entered upon him, they said, "Peace." He said, "We are worrisome of you."
They said, "Do not worry, we bring you good news of a knowledgeable son."
He said, "What good news can you bring me when old age has come upon me? Is that your good news?"
They said, "We have brought you good news with truth, so do not be of those in denial."
He said, "Who would deny the mercy of his Lord except the misguided ones!"
He said, "What then is your business here, O messengers?"
They said, "We have been sent to a people who are criminals;"
"Except for the family of Lot, we will save them all;"
"Except for his wife, we have measured that she will be with those destroyed."
So when the messengers came to the family of Lot.
He said, "You are a people unknown to me."
They said, "Alas, we have come to you with what they are in doubt."
"We have come to you with the truth, and we are forthcoming."
"So let your family leave during the last moments of the night, and you follow just behind them, and do not let any of you look back, and go to where you are commanded."
We conveyed him the decree, that the remnants of these people will be cut off in the morning.
The people of the city came seeking good news.
He said, "These are my guests, so do not embarrass me!"
"Be aware of God, and do not disgrace me!"
They said, "Did we not forbid you from outsiders?"
He said, "Here are my daughters if you are going to act."*
By your life, they are in their drunkenness, blundering.
So the scream took them at sunrise.
Thus We turned it upside down, and rained upon them with fiery projectiles.
In this are signs for those who distinguish.
It is on an established path.
In that is a sign for those who acknowledge.
The dwellers of the forest were wicked.
So, We sought revenge from them. They were both on an open plain.
The dwellers of the cavern rejected the messengers.
We gave them Our signs, but they turned away from them.
They used to sculpt from the mountains dwellings that were secure.
But the blast took them in the morning.
What they earned did not benefit them.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is in between except with the truth. The moment is coming, so overlook their faults gracefully.*
Your Lord is the Creator, the Knower.
We have given you seven of the pairs and the great Quran.*
So do not linger with your eyes on what We have bestowed upon some couples from them, do not grieve for them, and lower your wing for those who acknowledge.
Say, "I am a manifest warner."
As We have sent down on the dividers.*
The ones who have taken the Quran apart.
By your Lord, We will ask them all.
Regarding what they used to do.
So proclaim what you have been commanded and turn away from those who set up partners.
We will relieve you from the mockers.
Those who sat up with God another god; they will come to know.
We know that your chest is strained by what they say.
So glorify with the praise of your Lord, and be of those who prostrate.
Serve your Lord until certainty comes to you.
God's command has come; so do not hasten it. Glorified is He and High above the partners they have set up.*
He sends down the angels with the Spirit by His command upon whom He wishes of His servants: "That you shall warn that there is no god but I, so be aware of Me."
He created the heavens and the earth with the truth. He is High above the partners they have set up.
He created the human being from a seed, but then he becomes a clear opponent.
The livestock He created for you, in them is warmth and benefits, and from them you eat.
For you in them is attraction, when you relax and when you travel.
They carry your loads to a place you would not have been able to reach except with great strain. Your Lord is Kind, Compassionate.
The horses, the mules, and the donkeys, that you may ride them and as an adornment. He creates what you do not know.*
To God shall be the path, but some are mislead. If He wished, He could have guided you all.
He is the One who sent down water from the sky for you, from it you drink, and from it emerge the trees that you wander around in.
He brings forth with it vegetation, olives, palm trees, grapes and from all the fruits. In that are signs for a people who think.
He committed for you the night, the day, the sun, the moon. Also the stars are committed by His command. In that are signs for a people who reason.
What He has placed for you on earth in various colors. In that are signs for a people who remember.
He is the One who committed the sea, that you may eat from it a tender meat, and that you may extract from it pearls that you wear. You see the ships flowing through it, so that you may seek from His bounty, and that you may be thankful.
He has cast into the earth stabilizers so that it does not sway with you, and rivers, and paths, perhaps you will be guided.
Landmarks, and by the stars they use to guide.
Is the One who creates the same as one who does not create? Will you not remember?
If you count the blessings of God you will not be able to fathom them. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
God knows what you hide and what you declare.
As for those they call on besides God, they do not create anything, but are themselves created!
They are dead, not alive, and they will not know when they are resurrected.
Your god is One god. Those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter, their hearts are denying, and they are arrogant.
Certainly, God knows what they hide and what they declare. He does not like the arrogant.
If they are told: "What has your Lord sent down?" They say, "Fairytales of the past."*
They will carry their burdens in full on the day of Resurrection, and also from the burdens of those whom they misguided without knowledge. Evil indeed is what they bear.*
Those before them have schemed, but God came to their buildings from the foundation, thus the roof fell on top of them, and the retribution came to them from where they did not know.
Then, on the day of Resurrection He will humiliate them, and say, "Where are My partners whom you used to dispute regarding them?" Those who have received the knowledge said, "The humiliation today and misery is upon the ingrates."
Those whom the angels take while they had wronged themselves: "Amnesty, we did not do any evil!" "Alas, God is aware of what you had done."
"So enter the gates of hell, in it you shall reside; such is the abode of the arrogant."
It was said to those who were righteous: "What has your Lord sent down?" They said, "All goodness." For those who have done good in this world there is good, and the Hereafter is even better. Excellent indeed is the home of the righteous.
The gardens of Eden, which they will enter, with rivers flowing beneath, in it they will have what they wish. It is such that God rewards the righteous.
Those whom the angels take, while they had been good, they will say, "Peace be upon you, enter paradise because of what you have done."
Are they waiting for the angels to come for them, or a command from your Lord? It was exactly the same as what those before them did. God did not wrong them, but it was their own selves that they wronged.
Thus, the evil of their work afflicted them, and they were surrounded by what they used to make fun of!
Those who set up partners said, "If God had wished it, we would not have served anything besides Him; neither us nor our fathers; nor would we have forbidden anything without Him." Those before them did the exact same thing; so are the messengers required to do anything but deliver with proof?*
We have sent a messenger to every nation: "You shall serve God and avoid transgression." Some of them were guided by God, and some of them deserved to be misguided. So travel in the land, and see how the punishment was of those who denied.
If you are concerned for their guidance, God does not guide whom He misleads. They will have no victors.
They swore by God, in their strongest oaths, that God will not resurrect whoever dies. No, it is a promise of truth upon Him, but most people do not know.
So that He will make clear for them that in which they have disputed, and so that those who have rejected will know that they were liars.
When we want something, our word is only to say to it: "Be," and it is.*
Those who have emigrated for God, after they were oppressed, We will grant them good in the world, and the reward of the Hereafter will be greater, if they knew.
Those who are steadfast, and put their trust in their Lord.
We did not send any except men/walkers before you whom We inspired, so ask the people who received the Reminder if you do not know.
With proof and the scriptures. We sent down to you the Reminder to proclaim to the people what was sent to them, and perhaps they would think.*
Have those who schemed evil guaranteed that God will not make the earth swallow them, or the retribution come to them from where they do not expect?
Or that He will take them in their actions as they cannot escape?
Or that He will take them while they are in fear? Your Lord is Kind, Compassionate.
Did they not see that what God has created, its shadow inclines to the right and the left prostrating to God, willingly?
To God prostrate all those in the heavens and all those on the earth, from the creatures as well as the angels, and they are not arrogant.*
They fear their Lord from above them, and they do what they are commanded.
God said, "Do not take-up two gods, there is only One god, so it is Me that you shall revere."
To Him is what is in the heavens and the earth, and the system shall always be to Him. Is it other than God that you shall be aware of?*
Any blessings that are with you are from God. Then, when harm afflicts you, to Him you cry out.
Then, when He removes the harm from you, a group of you set up partners with their Lord!
So they reject what We have given them. Enjoy, for you will come to know.
They allocate a portion from what We provide to them to what they did not have knowledge of. By God, you will be asked about the lies you have invented!
They assign their daughters to God; be He glorified; and to them is what they desire.
When one of them is given news of a female, his face becomes darkened and he is in grief!*
He hides from his people because of the bad news he has received. Shall he keep her with dishonor, or bury her in the sand? Miserable indeed is how they judge!
For those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter is the worst example, and for God is the highest example, and He is the Noble, the Wise.
If God were to immediately call the people to account for their transgression, then He would not leave a single creature standing. But He delays them to a determined time; so when that time comes to any of them, they cannot delay it by one moment or advance it.
They attribute to God what they hate, and their tongues assert lies that they will get the best. No doubt they will have the fire, for they have rebelled.
By God, We have sent others to nations before you, but the devil adorned their work for them. So he is their ally today, and they will have a painful retribution.
We did not send down the book to you except that you may proclaim to them that in which they disputed, and as a guidance and mercy to a people who acknowledge.*
God has sent down water from the sky, so He revives the land with it after its death. In that is a sign for a people who listen.
For you there is a lesson in the livestock; We give you to drink from what is in its stomachs between the digested food and the blood, pure milk which is relieving for the drinkers.
From the fruits of the palm trees and the grapes you make wine as well as a good provision. In that is a sign for a people who reason.*
Your Lord inspired to the bee: "You shall take homes of the mountains and of the trees and of what they erect."
Then you shall eat from every fruit, so seek the path your Lord has made easy. From its stomachs will emerge a liquid that has different colors, wherein there is a healing for the people. In that is a sign for a people who will think.*
God created you, then He will take you. Some of you will continue to the most miserable age so that he will not know anything after knowledge. God is Omniscient, Omnipotent.
God has preferred some of you over others in provision. Those who have been preferred will not relinquish their provision to those whom they have contractual rights, so they may become equal in it. Are they denying the favor of God?*
God has made for you mates from amongst yourselves, and He has made from your mates children and grandchildren, and He has provided you from the good provisions. Do they acknowledge falsehood, while in God's favor they are denying?
They serve besides God what does not and cannot possess anything of the provisions from the sky or the land.
So do not give parables to God. God knows while you do not know.
God cites the example of a slave who is owned and cannot control anything, against one whom We have provided a good provision which he spends of it secretly and openly. Are they the same? God be praised, but most of them do not know.
God puts forth the example of two men, one of them is mute and he cannot control anything, and he is a burden to his master. Wherever he points him, he does not come with any good. Is he the same as one who orders good and he is on a straight path?*
To God is the mystery of the heavens and the earth, and the matter of the moment is like the blink of the eye or nearer. God is capable of all things.
God brought you out of your mothers wombs while you knew nothing. He made for you the hearing and the eyesight and the heart, perhaps you would be thankful.
Did they not look to the birds held in the atmosphere of the sky? No one holds them up except God. In that are signs for a people who acknowledge.
God has made your homes a habitat, and He made for you from the hides of the livestock shelter which you find light for travel and when you stay, and from its wool, fur, and hair you make furnishings and goods, for a while.
God has made for you shade from what He created. He made from the mountains a refuge for you. He made for you garments which protect you from the heat, and garments which protect you from attack. It is such that He completes His blessing upon you, that you may peacefully surrender.
So if they turn away, then you are only required to deliver clearly.
They recognize God's blessing, then they deny it. Most of them are ingrates.
The day We send from every nation a witness, then those who have rejected will not be given leave, nor will they be allowed to make amends.
Then those who were wicked will see the retribution; it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite.
When those who set up partners saw the partners they made, they said, "Our Lord, these are our partners that we used to call upon besides You." But they returned in answer to them: "You are liars!"*
They peacefully surrendered to God on that day, and what they had invented abandoned them.
Those who rejected, and repelled others from the path of God, We have increased the retribution for them over the retribution for what they had corrupted.
The day We send to every nation a witness against them from themselves, and We have brought you as a witness against these. We have sent down to you the book as a clarification for all things, a guide, mercy and good tidings for those who have peacefully surrendered.*
God orders justice and goodness, and that you shall help your relatives, and He forbids from evil, vice, and transgression. He warns you that you may remember.
You shall fulfill your pledge to God when you pledge so, and do not break your oath after making it, for you have made God a sponsor over you. God is aware of what you do.
Do not be like the one who unraveled her knitting after it had become strong, by breaking your oaths as a means of deception between you, because a nation is more numerous than another nation. God only puts you to the test by it. He will show you on the day of Resurrection what you were disputing in.
Had God wished, He would have made you one nation, but He misguides whom He wishes, and He guides whom He wishes. You will be asked about what you used to do.*
Do not use your oaths as a means of deception between you, that a foot will falter after it had been firm, and you will taste the evil of turning away from the path of God, and you will have a great retribution.
Do not purchase with God's pledge a cheap price. What is with God is far better for you if you know.
What you have will run out, while what God has will remain. We will recompense those who are patient, their reward with the best of what they used to do.
Whoever does good work, be he male or female, and is an acknowledger, We will give him a good life and We will reward them their dues with the best of what they used to do.*
So, when you study the Quran, you shall seek refuge with God from Satan the outcast.*
He has no authority over those who acknowledge, and who put their trust in their Lord.
His authority is over those who follow him, and those who set him up as a partner.
If We exchange a sign in place of another sign; and God is more aware of what He is revealing; they say, "You are making this up!" Alas, most of them do not know.
Say, "The Holy Spirit has sent it down from your Lord with truth, so that those who acknowledge will be strengthened, and as a guidance and good news for those who have peacefully surrendered."
We are aware that they say, "A human is teaching him." The language of the one they refer to is foreign, while this is a clear Arabic language.*
Those who do not acknowledge God's signs, God will not guide them, and they will have a painful retribution.
Making up lies is only done by those who do not acknowledge God's signs, and these are the liars.
Whoever rejects God after having acknowledged; except for one who is forced while his heart is still content with acknowledgement; and has opened his chest to rejection, then they will have a wrath from God and they will have a great retribution.
That is because they preferred the worldly life over the Hereafter, and God does not guide the rejecting people.
Those are the ones whom God has stamped on their hearts, their hearing, and their sight; such are the heedless.
Without doubt, in the Hereafter they are the losers.
Your Lord is to those who emigrated after they were persecuted, then they strived and were patient; your Lord after that is Forgiving, Compassionate.
The day every person will come to argue for herself, and every person will be paid in full for what she did, and they will not be wronged.*
God cites the example of a town which was peaceful and content, its provisions were coming to it bountifully from all places, but then it rebelled against God's blessings and God made it taste hunger and fear for what they used to do.
A messenger came to them from themselves, but they denied him. So, the punishment took them while they were wicked.
So eat from what God has provided for you, what is good and lawful, and thank the blessings of God, if it is indeed He whom you serve.*
He only made forbidden for you what is already dead, blood, the meat of pig, and what was sacrificed to any other than God. But whoever is forced to, without disobedience or transgression, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
You shall not invent lies about God by attributing lies with your tongues, saying: "This is lawful and that is forbidden." Those who invent lies about God will not succeed.
A small enjoyment, and they will have a painful retribution.
For those who are Jews, We forbade what We narrated to you before. We did not wrong them, but it was themselves they used to wrong.
Yet, your Lord, to those who repent and reform after committing evil out of ignorance, your Lord after that is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Abraham was a nation, devoted to God, a monotheist, and he was not of those who set up partners.
Because he was thankful for His blessings, He chose him and guided him to a Straight Path.
We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he is of the reformed ones.
Then We inspired to you: "You shall follow the creed of Abraham, monotheism, and he was not of those who set up partners."*
The Sabbath was only decreed for those who disputed in it, and your Lord will judge between them for what they disputed in.
Invite to the path of your Lord with wisdom and good advice, and argue with them in the best possible manner. Your Lord is fully aware of who is misguided from His path, and He is fully aware of the guided ones.
If you penalize, then punish with an equivalent punishment inflicted on you. If you show patience then it is better for the patient ones.*
Be patient, and your patience is only possible by God. Do not grieve for them, and do not be depressed by what they scheme.
God is with those who are aware and are good doers.
Glory be to the One who took His servant by night from the Restricted Temple to the most distant temple which We had blessed around, so that We may show him of Our signs. Indeed, He is the Hearer, the Seer.*
We gave Moses the book and We made it guidance for the Children of Israel: "Do not pick any protector besides Me."
The progeny of those whom We carried with Noah, he was a thankful servant.
We decreed to the Children of Israel in the book, that you will make corruption twice on earth, and that you will reach the zenith of arrogance.
So, when the promise of the first one comes to pass, We would send against you servants of Ours who are very powerful, thus they managed to breach your very homes, and this was a promise which has come to pass.
Then We gave back to you your independence from them, and We supplied you with wealth and children, and We made you more influential.
If you do good, then it will be good for you, and if you do bad, then so be it. But when the promise of the second time comes, they will make your faces filled with sorrow and they will enter the Temple as they did the first time, and they will strike down all that was raised up.
Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you, and if you revert then so will We. We made hell a prison for the ingrates.
This Quran guides to what is more upright, and it gives glad tidings to those who acknowledge, those who do good work that they will have a great reward.
For those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter, We have prepared for them a painful retribution.
The human invites to evil with his invitation to good, and the human became hasty.
We made the night and the day as two signs, so We erased the sign of night and We made the sign of day manifest, that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may know the number of the years and the count. Everything We have detailed meticulously.
We have attached every human's deeds to his own neck, and We bring forth for him a book on the day of Resurrection which he will find on display.*
Read your book! Today, you suffice as a reckoner against yourself.
Whoever is guided is guided for himself, and whoever is misguided is for his own loss. No person shall carry the load of another, and We were not to punish until We send a messenger.*
If We wish to destroy a town, We allow its privileged hedonists to rule it, then they commit evil in it, then it deserves the punishment, then We destroy it completely.
How many a generation have We destroyed after Noah? It is enough for your Lord to have knowledge and sight over the sins of His servants.
Whoever seeks the life of haste, We will hasten for Him what he wishes, then We will make hell for him a place which he will reach disgraced and rejected.
Whoever seeks the Hereafter and strives for it as it deserves, and is an acknowledging person, then their effort is appreciated.
For both groups We will bestow from the bounty of your Lord. The bounty of your Lord is never restricted.
See how We have preferred some of them over the others; and in the Hereafter are greater levels, and greater preference.
Do not set up with God another god; or you will find yourself disgraced, abandoned.
Your Lord decreed that you shall not serve except Him, and do good to your parents. When one of them or both of them reaches old age, do not say to them a word of disrespect nor raise your voice at them, but say to them a kind saying.
Lower for them the wing of humility through mercy, and say, "My Lord, have mercy upon them as they have raised me when I was small."
Your Lord is fully aware of what is in yourselves. If you are good, then He is to those who repent a Forgiver.
Give the relative his due, and the poor, and the wayfarer; and do not waste excessively.
Those who waste excessively are brothers to the devils, and the devil was an unappreciative of his Lord.
If you turn away from them to seek a mercy from your Lord which you desire, then say to them a gentle saying.
Do not make your hand stingy by holding it to your neck, nor shall you make it fully open so you become in despair and regret.
Your Lord lays out openly the provision for whom He wishes, and He is able to do so. He is Ever-aware and Watcher to His servants.
Do not kill your born children out of fear of poverty; We shall provide for you and them. The killing of them was a big mistake.*
Do not go near adultery, for it is a sin and an evil path.
Do not kill, for God has made this forbidden, except in the course of justice. Whoever is killed unjustly, then We have given his heir authority. Since he received help let him not transgress in the taking of a life.
Do not go near the orphan's money, except for what is best, until he reaches maturity. Fulfill your oath, for the oath brings responsibility.
Give full measure when you deal, and weigh with a balance that is straight. That is good and better in the end.
Do not uphold what you have no knowledge of. For the hearing, eyesight, and mind, all these are held responsible for that.*
Do not walk in the land arrogantly, for you will not penetrate the earth, nor will you reach the mountains in height.
All of this is bad, and disliked by your Lord.
That is from what your Lord has inspired to you of the wisdom. Do not make with God another god, or you will be cast into hell, blameworthy and rejected.*
Has your Lord preferred for you the males, while He takes the females as Angels? You are indeed saying a great thing!
We have cited in this Quran so they may remember, but it only increases their aversion!
Say, "If there had been gods with Him as they say, then they would have tried to gain a way to the Possessor of Authority."
Be He glorified and high above from what they say.
He is glorified by the seven heavens and the earth and who is in them, and there is not a thing but it glorifies His praise, but you do not understand their glorification. He is Compassionate, Forgiving.
When you study the Quran, We place between you and those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter an invisible barrier.
We place shields over their hearts, that they should not understand it, and deafness in their ears. If you mention your Lord in the Quran alone, they run away turning their backs in aversion.*
We are fully aware of what they are listening to when they are listening to you, and when they conspire secretly the wicked say, "You are but following a bewitched man!"
See how they cite the examples for you. They have gone astray, and cannot come to the path.
They said, "When we are bones and fragments, will we then be resurrected to a new creation?"
Say, "Even if you be stones or iron."
"Or a creation that is held dear in your chests." They will say, "Who will return us?" Say, "The One who initiated you the first time." They will shake their heads to you and say, "When is this?" Say, "Perhaps it is near."
The day He calls you and you respond by His grace, and you think that you only stayed a little while.
Say to My servants to speak what is best. The devil plants animosity between them. The devil was to the people a clear enemy.
Your Lord is fully aware of you, if He wishes He will have mercy on you, or if He wishes He will punish you. We have not sent you as a guardian over them.
Your Lord is fully aware of who is in the heavens and the earth. We have preferred some prophets over others, and We gave David the Psalms.*
Say, "Call on those you have claimed besides Him. For they have no power to remove harm from you or shift it."
The ones they call on, they are themselves seeking a path to their Lord which is nearer, and they desire His mercy, and they fear His retribution. The retribution of your Lord is to be feared!
There is not a town before the day of Resurrection that We will not destroy it, or punish it a severe punishment. This has been written in the record.
The rejection of previous people did not stop Us from sending the signs. We sent to Thamud the camel with foresight, but they did her wrong. We do not send the signs except to alert.*
We had said to you: "Your Lord has encompassed the people." We did not make the vision that We showed you except as a test for the people, and the tree that was cursed in the Quran. We alert them, but it only increases their transgression.*
We said to the angels: "Fall prostrate to Adam." So they fell prostrate except for Satan, he said, "Shall I prostrate to one you have created from clay!"
He said, "Shall I show You this one whom You have preferred over me, that if You respite me until the day of Resurrection, I will destroy his progeny, except for a few."
He said, "Go, and whoever follows you from them. Hell shall be the reward to you all, a reward well deserved."
"Mobilize whoever you can of them with your voice, and mobilize all your forces and men against them, and you may share with them in their money and children, and promise them." But the devil promises nothing but deceit.
"As for My servants, you will have no power over them." Your Lord suffices as a Caretaker.*
Your Lord is the One Who drives the ships for you in the sea so that you may seek of His bounty. He is Compassionate towards you.*
When harm should afflict you at sea, then all those whom you called on besides Him suddenly vanish from you except for Him. So when He saves you to dry land, you turn away. The people are ever ungrateful.
Are you confident that He will not cause this side of the land to swallow you up, or that He would not send a violent storm against you? Then you will find no caretaker for yourselves.
Or are you confident that He would not send you back again in it, then He would send against you a violent wind and cause you to drown for your rejection? Then you will not find a pursuer against Us.
We have honored the Children of Adam and carried them in the land and the sea, and We have provided for them of the good things, and We have preferred them over many of those We created.
The day We call every people by their record. Then, whoever are given their book by their right, they will read their book, and they will not be wronged in the least.
Whosoever is blind in this, then he will be blind in the Hereafter and more astray from the path.
They nearly diverted you from what We inspired to you so that you would fabricate something different against Us, and then they would have taken you as a friend!
If We had not made you stand firm, you were about to lean towards them a little bit.
Then, We would have made you taste double the retribution in this life and double the retribution in death. Then you would not find for yourself any victor against Us.
They nearly enticed you to drive you out of the land. But in that case, they would have shortly been destroyed after you were gone.*
This is the way of those whom We sent before you of Our messengers. You will not find any change in Our way.
You shall hold the contact prayer at the setting of the sun, until the darkness of the night; and the Quran at dawn, the Quran at dawn has been witnessed.*
From the night you shall reflect upon it additionally for yourself, perhaps your Lord would grant you to a high rank.
Say, "My Lord, admit me an entrance of truth and let me exit an exit of truth, and grant me from Yourself a victorious authority."
Say, "The truth has come and falsehood has perished. Falsehood is always bound to perish!"
We send down from the Quran what is a healing and mercy to those who acknowledge. It only increases the wicked in their loss.*
When We bless the human being, he turns away and turns his side. But when adversity touches him, he is ever in despair!
Say, "Let each work according to his own. Your Lord is fully aware of who is best guided to the path."
They ask you concerning the Spirit. Say, "The Spirit is from the command of my Lord, and the knowledge you were given was but very little."*
If We wished, We would take away what We have inspired to you. Then you would not find for yourself with it against Us a caretaker.
Except for a mercy from your Lord. His favor upon you has been great.
Say, "If all the humans and the Jinn were to gather to bring a Quran like this, they could not come with its like, even if they were helping one another."*
We have cited to the people in this Quran of every example, but most of the people refuse to be anything but ingrates!
They said, "We will not acknowledge you until you cause a spring of water to burst from the land"
"Or that you have a garden of palm trees and grapes, and you cause gushing rivers to burst through it."
"Or that you make the sky fall upon us in pieces as you claimed, or that you bring God and the angels before us."
"Or that you have a luxurious mansion, or that you can ascend into the heavens. We will not acknowledge your ascension unless you bring for us a book that we can study." Say, "Glory be to my Lord. Am I anything other than a human messenger!"
Nothing stopped the people from acknowledging when the guidance came to them, except they said, "Has God sent a human messenger?"
Say, "If the earth had angels walking about at ease, We would have sent down to them from heaven an angel as a messenger."
Say, "God suffices as a witness between me and you. He is Ever-aware and Watcher over His servants."
Whomever God guides is the truly guided one. Whomever He misguides then you will not find for them any allies except for Him. We gather them on the day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, mute, and deaf; their abode will be hell. Every time it dies down, We increase for them the fire.
Such is their recompense that they rejected Our signs, and they said, "If we are bones and fragments, will we be sent into a new creation?"
Did they not see that God who has created the heavens and the earth is able to create their like? He has made an appointed time for them in which there is no doubt. But the wicked refuse anything except rejection.
Say, "If you were the ones possessing the vaults of my Lord's mercy, you would have held back for fear of spending. The human being became stingy!"
We had given Moses nine clear signs. So ask the Children of Israel, when he came to them, then Pharaoh said, "I think that you Moses are bewitched!"
He said, "You know that no one has sent these down except for the Lord of the heavens and the earth as visible proofs. I think that you Pharaoh are doomed!"
So he wanted to entice them out of the land. But We drowned him and all those with him.
We said after him to the Children of Israel: "Dwell in the land, then, when the time of the second promise comes, We will bring you all together as a mixed crowd."*
It is with truth that We have sent it down, and with truth it came down. We have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner.
A Quran/Recitation that We have separated, so that you may relate it to the people over time; and We have brought it down gradually.
Say, "Acknowledge it or do not acknowledge. Those who have been given the knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, they fall to their chins prostrating.
They say, "Praise be to our Lord. Truly, the promise of our Lord was fulfilled."
They fall upon their chins crying, and it increases them in humility.
Say, "Call on God or call on the Gracious. Whichever it is you call on, to Him are the best names." Do not be loud/public in your contact prayer, nor quiet/private; but seek a path in between.*
Say, "Praise is to God, who has not taken a son, nor does He have a partner in sovereignty, nor does He have an ally out of weakness." Glorify Him greatly.
Praise be to God who sent down the book to His servant, and He did not allow any flaw in it.
Straightforward; giving warning of the severe punishment from Him; and it gives glad tidings to those who acknowledge and do good works that they will have a fair reward.
In which they will abide eternally.
To warn those who said, "God has taken a son."
They have no knowledge of this, nor do their fathers. Horrendous indeed is the word coming out of their mouths. They are but saying a lie!
Perhaps you will torment yourself in grief over them, because they will not acknowledge this saying at all.
We have made what is on earth an adornment for it, so that We will test them as to who is better in deeds.
We will then make what is on it a barren wasteland.*
Did you reckon that the dwellers of the cave and the numerals were of Our wondrous signs?*
When the youths hid in the cave, and they said, "Our Lord, bring us a mercy from Yourself, and prepare for us a right direction in our affair!"
So We sealed upon their ears in the cave for a number of years.
Then We roused them to know which of the two groups would be best at calculating the duration of their stay.
We narrate to you their news with truth. They were youths who acknowledged their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.
We made firm their hearts when they stood and said, "Our Lord, the Lord of heavens and earth, we will not call besides Him any god. Had We said so then it would be far astray."
"Here are our people, they have taken gods besides Him, while they do not come with any clear authority. Who then is more wicked than one who invents lies about God?"
So when you withdraw from them and what they serve besides God, seek refuge in the cave, and your Lord will distribute His mercy upon you and prepare for your problem a solution.*
You see the sun when it rises, visiting their cave from the right, and when it sets, it touches them from the left, while they are in an enclosure from it. That is from God's signs. Whomever God guides is the guided one, and whomever He misguides, you will not find for him any guiding friend.
You would reckon they are awake while they are asleep. We turn them on the right-side and on the left-side, and their dog has his legs outstretched by the entrance. If you looked upon them you would have run away from them and you would have been filled with fear from them!
Thus We roused them so they would ask themselves. A speaker from amongst them said, "How long have you stayed?" They said, "We stayed a day or part of a day." He said, "Your Lord is surely aware how long you stayed, so send one of you with these money of yours to the city, and let him see which is the tastiest food, and let him come with a provision of it. Let him be courteous and let no one take notice of you."
"If they discover you, they will stone you or return you to their creed. Then you will never be successful."
Thus We let them be discovered so that they would know that God's promise is true and that there is no doubt regarding the moment. They argued amongst themselves regarding them, so they said, "Erect a monument for them!" Their Lord is fully aware of them. Those who managed to win the argument said, "We will construct a temple over them."*
They will say, "Three, the fourth is their dog." They say, "Five, the sixth is their dog," guessing at what they do not know. They say, "Seven, and the eighth is their dog." Say, "My Lord is fully aware of their number, none know them except for a few." So, do not debate in them except with proof, and do not seek information regarding them from anyone.*
Do not say of anything: "I will do this tomorrow;"
"Except if God wills." Remember your Lord if you forget and say, "Perhaps my Lord will guide me closer than this to the truth."
They remained in their cave for three hundred years, and increased nine.*
Say, "God is fully aware how long they remained, to Him is the unseen of heavens and earth, He sees and hears. They do not have besides Him any ally, nor does He share in His judgment with anyone."
Recite what has been inspired to you from your Lord's book, there is no changing His words, and you will not find besides Him any refuge.
Have patience upon yourself regarding those who call on their Lord at dawn and dusk seeking His presence, and let not your eyes overlook them that you seek the attraction of this worldly life. Do not obey the one whom We have made his heart heedless of Our remembrance and he followed his desire, and his case was lost.
Say, "The truth is from your Lord, whoever desires may acknowledge, and whoever desires may reject." We have prepared for the wicked a fire whose walls will be surrounding them. If they cry out, they are given a liquid like boiling oil which burns their faces. What a miserable place!*
Those who acknowledge and do good works, We do not waste the reward of those who have done well.
They will have the gardens of Eden with rivers flowing beneath them, and they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and they will wear green garments of fine silk. They will sit in it on raised thrones. Beautiful is the reward, and beautiful is the dwelling place.
Give them the example of two men. We made for one of them two gardens of grapes, We surrounded them with palm trees, and We made between them a green field.*
Both gardens brought forth their fruit, and none failed in the least. We caused a river to pass through them.
He had abundant fruit, so he said to his friend while conversing with him: "I am better off than you financially, and of great influence."
He went back into his garden while he had wronged himself. He said, "I do not think that this will ever perish.
I do not also think that the moment is coming. If I am indeed returned to my Lord, then I will surely find even better things for me."
His friend said to him while conversing with him: "Have you rejected the One who created you from dirt, then from a seed, and then He completed you to a man?"
"But He is God, my Lord, and I do not place any partners at all with my Lord."
"When you entered your garden, you should have said, "This is what God has given, there is no power except by God." You may see me as being less than you in wealth and in children."
"Yet, perhaps my Lord will give me better than your garden, and send upon it a reckoning from the sky, so it becomes completely barren."
"Or that its water becomes deep under-ground, so you will not be able to seek it."
So his fruits were ruined, and he began turning his hands for what was destroyed upon its foundations though he has spent on it. He said, "I wish I did not make any partner with my Lord!"
He had no group which could help against God, and he would not have had victory.
Such is the true authority of God. He is best to reward, and best to punish.*
Give them the parable of this worldly life, like water which We have sent down from the sky, so that the plants of the earth mix with it and it turns dry twigs scattered by the wind. God is capable of all things.
Wealth and buildings are the attraction of this life. But the good deeds that remain behind are better at your Lord for a reward, and better for hope.
The day We move the mountains, and you see the earth barren, and We gather them, not leaving out anyone of them.
They are displayed before your Lord as a column: "You have come to Us as We had created you the first time. No, you claimed We would not make an appointment for you!"
The book was displayed, so you see the criminals fearful of what is in it. They say, "Woe to us!, what is wrong with this book that it does not leave out anything small or large except that it has counted it." They found what they had done present. Your Lord does not wrong anyone.
When We said to the angels: "Submit to Adam." They all submitted except for Satan, he was of the Jinn, so he disobeyed the order of his Lord. "Will you take him and his progeny as allies besides Me, while they are your enemy?" Miserable for the wicked is the substitute!*
I did not make them witness the creation of heavens and earth, nor the creation of themselves. Nor do I take the misleaders as helpers.
The day when He says: "Call on your partners that you had claimed." So they called them, but they did not respond to them. We made between them a place of destruction.
The criminals saw the fire; they realized they will be placed in it, and they did not find any way to avert it.
We have cited in this Quran every example for the people. But the human being is always most argumentative.
When the guidance came to them nothing prevented the people from acknowledging, and seeking forgiveness from their Lord, except they sought to receive the ways of the previous people, or receive the retribution face to face.
We do not send the messengers except as bearers of good news and warners. But those who reject will argue using falsehood to overshadow the truth with it. They took My signs and what they have been warned by as a joke!
Who is more wicked than one who is reminded of his Lord's signs but he turned away from them, and he forgot what his hands had done. We have made veils upon their hearts from understanding them, and deafness in their ears. If you invite them to the guidance, they will never be guided.
Your Lord is forgiving, with mercy. If He were to judge the people for what they had already earned, He would hasten for them the retribution. No, they have an appointment, beyond which they will find no escape.
Such are the towns which We had destroyed when they transgressed. We made for their destruction an appointed time.
Moses said to his youth: "I will not stop until I reach the junction of the two seas, or I spend a lifetime trying."
But when they did reach the junction between, they forgot their fish, and it was able to make its way back to the sea in a stream.
When they had passed further on, he said to his youth: "Bring us our lunch; we have found much fatigue in this journey of ours."
He said, "Do you remember when we rested upon the rock? I forgot the fish, and it was the devil that made me forget to remember it. It made its way back to the sea amazingly!"
He said, "That is what we have been seeking!" So they went back retracing their steps.
So they came upon a servant of Ours whom We had given him compassion from Us and We taught him knowledge from Us.
Moses said to him: "Can I follow you so that you will teach me from the guidance you have been taught?"
He said, "You will not be able to have patience with me."
"How can you be patient about what you have not been given any news?"
He said, "You will find me, God willing, to be patient. I will not disobey any command of yours."
He said, "If you follow me, then do not ask about anything until I relate it to you."
So they ventured forth until they rode in a boat and he made a hole in it. He said, "Did you make a hole in it to drown its people? You have done something dreadful!"
He said, "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to have patience with me?"
He said, "Forgive me for what I forgot, and do not be hard upon my request with you."
So they ventured forth until they came upon a youth, and he killed him. He said, "Have you killed an innocent person without justice? You have truly come with something awful!"
He said, "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to have patience with me?"
He said, "If I ask you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your company. You will then have a reason over me."
So they ventured forth until they came to the people of a town. They requested food from its people but they refused to host them. Then they found a wall which was close to collapsing, so he built it. He said, "If you wished, you could have asked a wage for it!"
He said, "For this, we will now part ways. I will inform you of the meanings of those things that you could not have patience over."
"As for the boat, it belonged to some poor people who were working the sea, so I wanted to damage it as there was a king coming who takes every boat by force."
"As for the youth, his parents were those who acknowledge, so we feared that he would oppress them by his transgression and denial."*
"So we wanted their Lord to replace for them with one who is better than him in purity and closer to mercy."
"As for the wall, it belonged to two orphaned boys in the city, and underneath it was a treasure for them, and their father was a good man, so your Lord wanted that they would reach their maturity and take out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. None of what I did was of my own accord. That is the meaning of what you could not have patience for."
They ask you about the one who is from Two Eras, say, "I will recite to you a memory from him."
We had facilitated for him in the land, and We had given him the means of everything.
So he followed the means.
Until he reached the setting of the sun, and he found it setting at a boiling lake, and he found near it a people. We said, "O Two Eras, either you are to punish, or you are to do them good."
He said, "As for he who has transgressed, we will punish him then he will be returned to his Lord and He will punish him an awful punishment."
"As for he who acknowledges and does good, then he will have the reward of goodness, and we will speak to him simply of our plan."
Then he followed the means.
So when he reached the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people whom We did not make for them any cover except it.*
So it was, and We knew ahead of time about what he intended.
Then he followed the means.
Until he reached the area between the two barriers, he found no one beside it except a people who could barely understand anything said.
They said, "O Two Eras, Gog and Magog are destroyers of the land, and so shall we make a tribute for you that you will make between us and them a barrier?"*
He said, "What my Lord has given me is far better. So help me with strength and I will make between you and them a barrier."
"Bring me iron ore." Until he leveled between the two walls, he said, "Blow," until he made it a furnace, he said, "Bring me tar so I can pour it over."
So they could not come over it, and they could not make a hole in it.
He said, "This is a mercy from my Lord. But when the promise of my Lord comes, He will make it rubble. The promise of my Lord is truth."
We left them till that day to surge like waves on one another. The horn was blown so We gathered them together.
We displayed hell openly on that day to those who do not appreciate.
Those whose eyes were closed from My remembrance, and they were unable to hear.
Did those who reject think that they can take My servants as allies besides Me? We have prepared hell for the ingrates as a dwelling place.
Say, "Shall we inform you of the greatest losers?
Those whose efforts in the worldly life were wasted while they thought they were doing good!"
These are the ones who rejected the signs of their Lord and His meeting. So their works were in vain, and We will not give them any value on the day of Resurrection.
That is their recompense, hell; for what they rejected and for taking My signs and My messengers for mockery!
Those who acknowledge and do good works, they will have gardens of paradise as a dwelling place.
Abiding therein. They will not want to be moved from it.
Say, "If the sea were an inkwell for the words of my Lord, then the sea would run out before the words of my Lord run out;" even if We were to bring another like it for its aid.
Say, "I am but a human being like you, being inspired that your god is One god. So whoever looks forward to meeting his Lord, then let him do good works and not set up any partner in the service of his Lord."
K20H5Y10A70S90*
A reminder of your Lord's mercy to His servant Zachariah.
When he called out to his Lord secretly.
He said, "My Lord, my bones have gone frail, and my hair has turned white, and I have never been mischievous in calling to You my Lord."
"I fear the kinfolk after I am gone, and my wife is infertile, so grant me from Yourself an ally."
"To inherit from me, and inherit from the descendants of Jacob. Make him, my Lord, well pleasing."
"O Zachariah, We give you glad tidings of a son whose name is John. We have not given that name before to anyone."*
He said, "My Lord, how can I have a son when my wife is infertile, and I have reached a very old age?"
He said, "It is such that your Lord has said. It is an easy thing for Me. I had created you before when you were not even anything."
He said, "My Lord, make for me a sign." He said, "Your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights consecutively."
So he went out amongst his people from the temple enclosure, and he indicated to them that they should glorify Him at dawn and dusk.
"O John, take the book with confidence." We gave him authority while in his youth.
He had kindness from Us and purity, and he was ever righteous.
Dutiful to his parents, and never was he a tyrant or disobedient.
Peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and the day he is resurrected alive.*
Relate in the book Mary, when she withdrew herself from her family to a place which was to the east.
She took to a barrier which separated her from them, so We sent Our Spirit to her, and he took on the shape of a human in all similarity.
She said, "I seek refuge with the Gracious from you if you are a person of acknowledgment."
He said, "I am the messenger of your Lord, that He may grant you the gift of a pure son."
She said, "How can I have a son when no human has touched me, nor do I desire such?"
He said, "It is such that your Lord has said, it is easy for Me. We shall make him a sign for the people and a mercy from Us. It is a matter already ordained."
So she was pregnant with him, and she went to deliver in a far place.
Then the birth pains came to her, by the trunk of a palm tree. She said, "I wish I had died before this, and became totally forgotten!"
But then he called to her from beneath her: "Do not be sad, your Lord has made below you a stream."*
"Shake the trunk of this palm tree, it will cause ripe dates to fall upon you."
"So eat and drink and be happy. If you see any human being, then say, "I have declared a fast for the Gracious, and I will not talk today to any of the people.""
Then she came to her people carrying him. They said, "O Mary, you have come with something totally unexpected!"
"O sister of Aaron, your father was not a bad man, and your mother was never unchaste!"
So she pointed to him. They said, "How can we talk to someone who is a child in a cradle?"
He said, "I am God's servant, He has given me the book and made me a prophet."
"He made me blessed wherever I was, and He charged me with the contact prayer and towards betterment as long as I am alive."
"To be dutiful to my mother, and He did not make me a rebellious tyrant."
"Peace be upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I am resurrected alive."
Such was Jesus, the son of Mary, and this is the truth of the matter in which they doubt.
God was never to take a son, be He glorified. If He decrees a matter, then He simply says to it: "Be," and it is.
God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him. This is a straight path.*
So the parties disputed between them. Therefore, woe to those who have rejected from the scene of a terrible day.
Listen to what they say and watch on the day they come to Us. But the wicked today are in clear misguidance.
Warn them of the day of remorse. When the matter is decided while they are oblivious, and they do not acknowledge.
It is We who will inherit the earth and all that is on it. To Us they will return.
Recall in the book Abraham. He was a sincere prophet.
When he said to his father: "O father, why do you serve what does not hear or see, nor help you in anything?"
"My father, knowledge has come to me which did not come to you. So follow me that I will guide you to a good path."
"My father, do not serve the devil. For the devil was ever disobedient to the Gracious."
"My father, I fear that a retribution will inflict you from the Gracious and that you will become an ally to the devil."
He said, "Have you abandoned my gods O Abraham? If you do not stop this, I will stone you. Leave me alone."*
He said, "Peace be upon you, I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord. He has been most kind to me."
"I will abandon you and what you call on besides God. I will call on my Lord. I hope that I will not be mischievous in calling upon my Lord."
So when he abandoned them and what they serve besides God, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and We made each a prophet.
We granted them from Our mercy, and We made for them a tongue of truth to be heard.
Recall in the book Moses; he was loyal, and he was a messenger prophet.
We called him from the right side of the mount, and We brought him close to talk with.
We granted him from Our mercy his brother Aaron as a prophet.
Recall in the book Ishmael; he was truthful to his promise, and he was a messenger prophet.
He used to instruct his family with the contact prayer and towards betterment, and his Lord was pleased with him.
Recall in the book Enoch; he was truthful, a prophet.
We raised him to a high place.
Those are the ones whom God has blessed from amongst the prophets from the progeny of Adam, and those We carried with Noah, and from the progeny of Abraham and Israel, and from whom We have guided and chosen. When the signs of the Gracious are recited to them, they fall down prostrating, and in tears.
Then generations came after them who lost the contact prayer, and followed desires. They will find their consequences.
Except for whoever repents and acknowledges and does good work; they will be admitted to paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least.
The gardens of Eden, which the Gracious had promised His servants in the unseen. His promise must come to pass.
They will not hear in it any nonsense, only peace. They will have their provision in it morning and evening.
Such is paradise that We inherit to any of Our servants who are righteous.
"We are not sent except by the command of your Lord. To Him is our present and our future, and all that is in-between. Your Lord was never to forget."*
"The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is in-between them. So serve Him and be patient in His service. Do you know anything that is like Him?"
The human says: "Can it be that when I am dead, I will be brought out alive?"
Does the human being not remember that We created him before that and he was nothing at all?
By your Lord, We will gather them and the devils, then We will place them around hell on their knees.
Then We will drag out from every group which of them was the worst opposition to the Gracious.
Then, it is We who are best aware of those who deserve to be burnt therein.
Every single one of you must pass by it. This for your Lord is a certainty that will come to pass.
Then We will save those who were righteous, and We leave the wicked in it on their knees.
When Our clear signs were recited to them, those who rejected said to those who acknowledged: "Which of the two groups of ours is more in authority and more prosperous?"
How many generations have We destroyed before them? They had more wealth and more influence.
Say, "Whoever is in misguidance, then the Gracious will lead them on." Until they see what they have been promised, either the retribution or the moment. Then they will know who is in a worst place and weaker in power.
God increases the guidance of those who are guided. What remains of good is better with your Lord as a reward and a far better return.
Did you see the one who rejected Our signs and said, "I will be given wealth and children."
Did he look into the future? Or has he taken a pledge with the Gracious?
No, We will record what he says, and We will increase for him the retribution significantly.
Then We inherit from him all that he said, and he shall come to Us all alone.
They have taken gods besides God to be for them their glory.*
On the contrary, they will reject their service of them and they will be standing against them.*
Did you not see that We send the devils upon the ingrates to drive them into evil?*
So do not be impatient; for We are preparing for them a preparation.
The day We gather the righteous to the Gracious as a delegation.
We drive the criminals to hell as a herd.
None will posses intercession, except for he who has taken a pledge with the Gracious.*
They said the Gracious has taken a son!
You have come with a gross blasphemy.
The heavens are about to shatter from it, and the earth crack open, and the mountains fall and crumble.
That they claimed that the Gracious had a son!
What need does the Gracious have to take a son?
When all there is in the heavens and the earth will but come to the Gracious as servants.
He has encompassed them, and counted them one by one.
All of them will come to Him on the day of Resurrection, all alone.
Those who acknowledge and do good works, the Gracious will bestow them with love.
Thus We have made this easy in your tongue so that you may give good news with it to the righteous and that you may warn with it the quarrelsome people.*
How many a generation have We destroyed before them? Do you perceive any of them or hear from them a sound?
T9H5*
We did not send down to you the Quran so you may suffer.
It is but a reminder for the one who takes heed.
Sent down from the One who created the earth and the heavens above.
The Gracious, on the throne He settled.
To Him is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and what is in between, and what is underneath the soil.
If you declare openly what you say, He knows the secret and what is hidden.
God, there is no god but He, to Him are the beautiful names.*
Did the news of Moses come to you?
When he saw a fire, so he said to his family: "Stay here, I have seen a fire, perhaps I can bring from it something, or find at the fire some guidance."
So when he came to it he was called: "O Moses."
"I am your Lord, so take off your slippers, you are in the holy valley Tawa."
"I have chosen you, so listen to what is being inspired."
"I am God, there is no god but Me, so serve Me and hold the contact prayer for My remembrance."*
"The moment is coming, I am almost keeping it hidden, so that every person will be recompensed with what it strived."*
"So do not be deterred from it by he who does not acknowledge it and followed his desire and perished."
"What is in your right hand O Moses?"*
He said, "It is my staff, I lean on it, and I guide my sheep with it, and I have other uses in it."
He said, "Cast it down O Moses."
So he cast it down, and it became a moving serpent!*
He said, "Take it and do not be fearful, We will turn it back to its previous form."
"Place your hand under your arm, it will come out white without blemish, as another sign."
"This is to show you Our great signs."
"Go to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed."
He said, "My Lord, relieve for me my chest."
"Make my mission easy."
"Remove the knot in my tongue."
"So they can understand what I say."
"Allow for me an advisor from my family."
"Aaron, my brother."
"So that I may strengthen my resolve through him."
"Share with him my mission."
"So that we may glorify You plenty."
"Remember You plenty."
"You Have been watcher over us."
He said, "You have been given what you asked O Moses."
"We Have graced you another time."
"When We inspired to your mother what was inspired."
"That she should cast him in the basket, and cast the basket in the sea, so the sea will place him on the shore, where an enemy of Mine and his will take him. I placed upon you a love from Me and that you shall be raised under My eye."
"That your sister should follow, and say, "Shall I guide you to a person who will nurse him?" Thus We returned you to your mother, so that she may be pleased and not be sad. You killed a person, but We saved you from harm and We tested you greatly. So it was that you stayed with the people of Midian for many years, then you came here by fate O Moses."
"I Have crafted you for Myself."*
"Go, you and your brother with Our signs, and do not linger from My remembrance."
"Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed."
"So say to him soft words, perhaps he will remember or take heed."
They said, "Our Lord, we fear that he would let loose upon us, or transgress."
He said, "Do not fear, I am with you, I hear and I see."
So come to him and say, "We are messengers from your Lord, so send with us the Children of Israel, and do not punish them. We have come to you with a sign from your Lord, and peace be upon those who follow the guidance."*
"It has been inspired to us that the retribution will be upon he who denies and turns away."
He said, "So who is the lord of you both O Moses?"
He said, "Our Lord is the One who gave everything its creation, then guided."
He said, "What then has happened to the previous generations?
He said, "Its knowledge is with my Lord, in a record. My Lord does not err or forget."
The One who made for you the earth habitable and He made ways for you in it, and He brought down water from the sky, so We brought out with it pairs of vegetation of all types.
Eat and raise your livestock, in that are signs for those of thought.
From it We created you and in it We return you, and from it We bring you out another time.
We showed him Our signs, all of them, but he denied and refused.
He said, "Have you come to us to take us out of our land with your magic O Moses?"
"We will bring you a magic like it, so let us make an appointment between us and you which neither of us will break, a place where we both agree."
He said, "Your appointment is the day of festival, and when the people start crowding during the late morning."
So Pharaoh went away, and he gathered his scheming then he came.
Moses said to them: "Woe to you, do not invent lies about God, else the retribution will take you, and miserable is the one who invents."
So they disputed in their matter between themselves, and they kept secret their council.
They said, "These are but two magicians who want to take you out of your land with their magic, and they want to do away with your ideal way.*
"So agree upon your scheme, then come as one front. Whoever wins today will succeed."
They said, "O Moses, either you cast down or we will be the first to cast down."
He said, "No, you cast down." So their ropes and staffs appeared from their magic as if they were moving.*
Moses held some fear in himself.
We said, "Do not fear, you will best them."
"Cast down what is in your right hand; it will consume what they have made. They have only made the work of a magician, and the magician will not succeed no matter what he does."
So the magicians went down in prostration. They said, "We acknowledge the Lord of Aaron and Moses."
He said, "Have you acknowledged to him before taking my permission? He is surely your great one who has taught you magic. So, I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides, and I will crucify you on the trunks of the palm trees, and you will come to know which of us is greater in retribution and more lasting!"
They said, "We will not prefer you over the proofs that have come to us, and over the One who initiated us. So issue whatever judgment you have, for you only issue judgment in this worldly life."
"We have acknowledged our Lord that He may forgive us our sins, and what you had forced us into doing of magic. God is better and everlasting."
He who comes to his Lord as a criminal, he will have hell, where he will neither die in it nor live.
He who comes to Him as an acknowledger doing good works, for those will be the highest ranks.
The gardens of Eden with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. Such is the reward of he who is developed.
We inspired to Moses: "Take My servants out, and make for them through the sea a path. You shall not fear being overtaken, nor be afraid."
So Pharaoh followed them with his soldiers, but the sea came over them and covered them.
Thus, Pharaoh misled his people and he did not guide.
O Children of Israel, We have saved you from your enemy, and We summoned you at the right side of the mount, and We sent down to you manna and quail.
Eat from the good things that We have provided for you and do not transgress in this, else My wrath will be upon you. Whomever has incurred My wrath is lost.
I am forgiving for whomever repents and does good work, then is guided.
"What has caused you to rush ahead of your people O Moses?"*
He said, "They are following my teachings, and I came quickly to you my Lord so you would be pleased."
He said, "We have tested your people after you left, and the Samarian misguided them."
So Moses returned to his people angry and disappointed. He said, "My people, did not your Lord promise you a good promise? Has the waiting been too long, or did you want that the wrath of your Lord to be upon you? Thus you broke the promise with me."
They said, "We did not break the promise by our own will, but we were loaded down with the jewelry of the people so we cast them down, and it was such that the Samarian suggested."
He then produced for them a statue of a calf that emitted a sound. So they said, "This is your god and the god of Moses, but he had forgotten!"
Did they not see that it did not respond to them? Nor did it possess for them any harm or benefit?
Aaron had told them before: "My people, you are being tested with it. Your Lord is the Gracious, so follow me and obey my command!"
They said, "We will remain devoted to it until Moses comes back to us."
He said, "O Aaron, what prevented you when you saw them being astray?
"Do you not follow me? Have you disobeyed my command?"
He said, "O son of my mother, do not grab me by my beard nor by my head. I feared that you would say that I separated between the Children of Israel, and that I did not follow your orders."
He said, "So what do you have to say O Samarian?"
He said, "I noticed what they did not notice, so I took a portion from the teaching of the messenger, and I cast it away. This is what my person inspired me to do."*
He said, "Then be gone, for you will have it in this life to say, "I am not to be touched." You will have an appointed time which you will not forsake. Look to your god that you remained devoted to, we will burn him, then we will destroy him in the sea completely."
Your god is God; whom there is no god but He. His knowledge encompasses all things.
It is such that We relate to you the news of what has passed. We have given you from Us a remembrance.
Whoever turns away from it, then he will carry a load on the day of Resurrection.
They will remain therein, and miserable on the day of Resurrection is what they carry.
The day the horn is blown, and We gather the criminals on that day white-eyed.
They whisper amongst themselves: "You have only been away for a period of ten."
We are fully aware of what they say, for the best in knowledge amongst them will say, "No, you have only been away for a day."
They ask you about the mountains, say, "My Lord will annihilate them completely."
"Then He will leave it as a smooth plain.
"You will not see in it any crookedness or curves."
On that day, they will follow the caller, there is no crookedness to him. All voices will be humbled for the Gracious, you will not be able to hear except whispers.
On that day, no intercession will be of help, except for he whom the Gracious allows and accepts what he has to say.*
He knows their present and their future, and they do not have any of His knowledge.
The faces shall be humbled for the Eternal, the Living. Whoever carried wickedness with him has failed.
Whoever does any good works, while he is an acknowledger, then he should not fear injustice nor being given less than his due.
It was such that We sent it down as an Arabic compilation, and We cited in it many warnings, perhaps they will become aware or it will cause for them a remembrance.*
Then High above all is God, the King, the Truth. Do not be hasty with the Quran before its inspiration is completed to you, and say, "My Lord, increase my knowledge."*
We had made a pledge to Adam from before, but he forgot, and We did not find in him the will power.*
We said to the angels: "Submit to Adam." They all submitted except for Satan, he refused.
So We said, "O Adam, this is an enemy to you and your mate. So do not let him take you out from the paradise, else you will have hardship."
"There you will not go hungry nor need clothes."
"There you will not go thirsty nor suffer from heat."
But the devil whispered to him, he said, "O Adam, shall I lead you to the tree of immortality and a kingdom which will not waste away?"
So they both ate from it, and their sin became apparent to them, and they began to place leaves on themselves from the paradise. Adam had disobeyed his Lord, and had gone astray.
Then his Lord recalled him, and He forgave him and gave guidance to him.
He said, "Descend from this, all of you, for you are enemies to one another. So, when My guidance comes to you; then, whoever follows My guidance, he will not go astray nor suffer."
"Whoever turns away from My remembrance, then he will have a miserable life, and We will raise him blind on the day of Resurrection."
He said, "My Lord, you have raised me blind while I used to be able to see?"
He said, "It was the same when Our signs came to you, you ignored them, and similarly today you will be ignored."
It is such that We recompense he who transgresses, and did not acknowledge His Lord's signs. The retribution of the Hereafter is more severe and lasting.
Is it not a guide to them how many generations We had destroyed before them, which they are walking now in their homes? In that are signs for the people of understanding.
Had it not been for a word already given by your Lord, they would have been held to account immediately.
So be patient to what they are saying and glorify the grace of your Lord before the rising of the sun, and before its setting, and from the early part of the night glorify, and at the edges of the day that you may be content.
Do not strain your eyes on what We have given other people as luxuries of this worldly life. We are testing them with it; and the provision of your Lord is better and more lasting.
Instruct your family with the contact prayer, and be patient for it. We do not ask you for provision, for We provide for you. The good end is for the righteous.
They said, "If only he would bring us a sign from his Lord!" Did not proof come to them from what is in the previous book?*
If We had destroyed them with retribution before this, they would have said, "Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger so we could follow Your signs before we are humiliated and shamed!"
Say, "All are waiting, so wait, and you will come to know who the people upon the even path are and who are guided."
The judgment of people has come near, while they are turning away unaware.
When a reminder comes to them from their Lord that is new, they listen to it while playing.*
Their hearts are preoccupied, and those who are wicked confer privately: "Is he not a human being like you? Would you accept this magic while you know?"
Say, "My Lord knows what is said in the heavens and in the earth, and He is the Hearer, the Knower."
They said, "No, these are just bad dreams; no, he made it up; no, he is a poet. So let him bring us a sign like those who were sent before."
None of the towns which We destroyed before them had acknowledged. Will they acknowledge?
We did not send before you except men whom We inspired. So ask the people of the remembrance if you do not know.*
We did not make for them bodies that do not need to eat, nor were they immortal.
Then We fulfilled the promise to them, so We saved them and whom We pleased, and We destroyed those who transgressed.
We have sent down to you a book in which is your remembrance. Do you not reason?
How many a town have We destroyed because of its wrongdoing, and We established after them a different people?
So it was that when they perceived Our power, they were running from it.
"Do not run; come back to your lavish lifestyle and your homes, so that you will be questioned!"
They said, "Woe to us, we have been wicked!"
So that remained as their cry until We took them all, and they became still.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them for entertainment.
If We wanted to be amused, We could have done so from what is already with Us, if that is what We wished to do.
No, We cast the truth upon the falsehood, so it disrupts it, and then it retreats. Woe to you for what you have described.
To Him is whoever is in the heavens and in the earth. Those who are near Him are not too proud to serve Him, nor do they complain.
They glorify in the night and the day, they do not cease.
Or have they taken gods from the earth who can resurrect?*
If there were gods in them except for God, then they would have been ruined. Glory be to God, the Lord of the dominion from what they describe.
He is not questioned about what He does, while they will be questioned.
Or have they taken gods besides Him? Say, "Bring your proof. This is a reminder of those with me and a reminder of those before me." But, most of them do not know the truth, so they turn away.
We did not send any messenger before you except that We inspired him that: "There is no god but Me, so serve Me."
They said, "The Gracious has taken a son!" Be He glorified, they are all but honored servants.
They do not speak ahead of Him, and on His command they act.
He knows their present and their future, and they cannot intercede unless it is for those whom He is pleased with. They stand in awe and reverence of Him.*
Whoever of them says: "I am a god besides Him," then We will punish that person with hell. It is such that We punish the wicked.
Did those who reject not see that the heavens and the earth were one mass and We tore them apart? That We made from the water everything that lives. Will they not acknowledge?*
We made on the earth stabilizers so that it would not tumble with you, and We made in it wide paths that they may be guided.
We made the sky a protective ceiling. Yet they are turning away from Our signs!*
He is the One who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each swimming in an orbit.*
We did not give immortality to any human that came before you. If you are going to die, would they be immortal?
Every person will taste death. We burden you with evil and good as a test, and it is to Us that you will return.
When those who reject see you, they take you for mockery: "Is this the one who speaks about your gods!" While in the remembrance of the Gracious they are ingrates!
The human being is made of haste. I will show you My signs, so do not be in a rush.*
They say, "When will this promise come to pass if you are truthful?"
If only those who reject knew, that they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces, nor from their backs, nor will they be helped.
No, it will come to them suddenly. They will not be able to turn it away, nor will they be delayed.
Messengers before you have been mocked, but those who mocked were then surrounded by the object of their mockery!
Say, "Who can protect you during the night and the day from the Gracious?" No, they are turning away from the remembrance of their Lord.
Or do they have gods that will protect them from Us? They cannot help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us.
It was Us who gave luxury to these and their fathers, until they grew old with age. Do they not see that We come to the land and make it shrink from its edges? Will they be able to win?
Say, "I am merely warning you with the inspiration." But the deaf do not hear the call when they are being warned.
If a breath of your Lord's torment touches them, they will say, "Woe to us, we have been wicked!"
We will place the scales of justice for the day of Resurrection, so that no person will be wronged in the least. Even if it was the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it. We are sufficient as a Reckoner.
We had given Moses and Aaron the Criterion, a shining light, and a reminder for the righteous.
Those who reverence their Lord, even when unseen, and they are wary of the moment.
This is a blessed reminder which We have sent down. Will you be deniers of it?
Before that We gave Abraham his understanding, and We were aware of him.*
As he said to his father and people: "What are these statues to which you are devoted?"
They said, "We found our fathers serving them."
He said, "You and your fathers have been clearly misguided."
They said, "Have you come to us with the truth, or are you simply playing?"
He said, "No, your lord is the Lord of heavens and earth, the One who initiated them. I bear witness to such."*
"By God, I will scheme against your statues after you have gone away and given your backs."
So he broke them into pieces except for the biggest of them, so that they may turn to him.*
They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He is surely one of the wicked."
They said, "We heard a young man mentioning them. He was called Abraham."
They said, "Bring him before the eyes of the people so that they may bear witness."
They said, "Did you do this to our gods O Abraham?"
He said, "It was the biggest one of them here who did it, so ask them, if they do speak!"
So they turned and said to themselves: "It is indeed ourselves who have been wicked!"
Then they reverted to their old ideas: "You know that they do not speak!"
He said, "Do you serve besides God what does not benefit you at all nor harm you?"
"I am fed-up with you and to what you serve besides God! Do you not reason?"
They said, "If you are to do anything, then burn him, and give victory to your gods."
We said, "O fire, be cool and safe upon Abraham."
They wanted to harm him, but We made them the losers.
We saved him and Lot to the land which We have blessed for the worlds.
We granted him Isaac and Jacob as a gift, and each of them We made a good doer.
We made them leaders who guide by Our command, and We inspired them to do good work and hold the contact prayer and contribute towards betterment, and they were in service to Us.*
And Lot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We saved him from the town that used to do vile things. They were a people of evil, corrupt.
We admitted him into Our mercy. He was of the good doers.
And Noah when he called out before that, thus We responded to him, and We saved him and his family from the great distress.
We granted him victory against the people that denied Our signs. They were a people of evil, so We drowned them all.
And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the case of the crop that was damaged by the sheep of the people, and We were witness to their judgment.
So We gave Solomon the correct understanding, and both of them We have given wisdom and knowledge. We committed the mountains with David to praise as well as the birds. This is what We did.
We taught him the making of armor for you to protect you from your enemy. Are you then thankful?
To Solomon the gusting winds run by his command all the way to the land which We have blessed. We were aware of everything.
From the devils are those who dive for him, and they perform other tasks, and We were guardian over them.
And Job when he called his Lord: "I have been afflicted with harm, and you are the Compassionate!"
So We answered him, and We removed what was afflicting him, and We brought him back his family and others with them as a mercy from Us and a reminder to those who serve.
Ishmael and Enoch and Isaiah, all of them were patient.
We admitted them in Our mercy, they were of the good doers.
The one with N, when he went off in anger, and he thought that We would not be able to take him. Then he called out in the darkness: "There is no god but You! Glory to You, I was of the wicked!"*
So We responded to him and We saved him from distress. It is such that We save the faithful.
And Zachariah when he called out to his Lord: "My Lord, do not leave me without an heir, and You are the best inheritor."
So We responded to him, and We granted him John, and We cured his wife. They used to hasten to do good, and they would call to Us in joy and in fear. To Us they were reverent.
The one who protected her chastity, so We blew into her from Our Spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for the worlds.
This is your nation, one nation, and I am your Lord so serve Me.
They disputed in the matter amongst themselves. Each of them will be returned to Us.
So whosoever does good work and he is an acknowledger, then his efforts will not be rejected and We will record it for him.
It is forbidden for a town that We destroy that they would return;
Until Gog and Magog is opened, and from every elevated place they will race forth.
The promise of truth draws near. Then, when it is seen by the eyes of those who rejected: "Woe to us, we have been oblivious to this. Indeed, we were wicked!"*
Both you and what you serve besides God shall be fuel for hell; you will enter it.
If these were gods, then they would not have entered it! All will abide therein.
They will be breathing heavily in it, and they will not be heard therein.
As for those who deserved good from Us, they will be removed far away from it.
They shall not hear the slightest sound from it, and they will be in what their person desires abiding therein.
The great horror will not sadden them, and the angels will receive them: "This is your day which you have been promised."
On the day when We roll up the heavens like a scroll of books is rolled up. As We initiated the first creation, so shall We return it. It is a promise of Ours that We will do this.
We have written in the Psalms: "After the reminder, that the earth will be inherited by My servants who do good."*
In this is a proclamation for a people who serve.*
We have not sent you except as a mercy to the worlds.
Say, "It is inspired to me that your god is but One god, so will you peacefully surrender to Him?"
So if they turn away, then say, "I have given you notice sufficiently, and I do not know if what you are promised is near or far."
"He knows what is spoken publicly and He knows what you keep secret."
"For all I know, it may be a test for you and an enjoyment for a while."
Say, "My Lord, judge with truth. Our Lord, the Gracious, is sought for what you describe."*
O people, be aware of your Lord, for the quaking of the moment is a terrible thing.
The moment you see it, every nursing mother will leave her suckling child, and every pregnant one will miscarry, and you will see the people drunk while they are not drunk, but the retribution of God is most severe.
Among the people there are those who argue regarding God without knowledge, and follow every rebellious devil.
It was decreed for him that any who follow him, he will mislead him, and guide him to the retribution of fire.
O people, if you are in doubt as to the resurrection, then We have created you from dirt, then from a seed, then from an embryo, then from a fetus developed and undeveloped so that We make it clear to you. We settle in the wombs what We wish to an appointed time, then We bring you out a child, then you reach your maturity, and of you are those who will pass away, and of you are those who are sent to an old age where he will not be able to learn any new knowledge after what he already has. You see the land still, but when We send down the water to it, it vibrates and grows, and it brings forth of every lovely pair.*
That is because God is the truth, and He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of all things.
The moment is coming, there is no doubt in it, and God will resurrect those who are in the graves.
From people are those who argue regarding God with no knowledge nor guidance nor an enlightening book.
Bending his side to misguide from the path of God. He will have humiliation in the world and We will make him taste on the day of Resurrection the retribution of burning.
That is for what your hands have brought forth, and God does not wrong the servants.
Among the people there is he who serves God hesitantly. So if good comes to him, he is content with it; and if an ordeal comes to him, he makes an about-face. He has lost this world and the Hereafter. Such is the clear loss.
He calls upon besides God what will not harm him and what will not benefit him. Such is the far straying.
He calls on those who harm him more than they benefit him. What a miserable patron, and what a miserable companion.*
God admits those who acknowledge and do good works to gardens with rivers flowing beneath them. God does as He wishes.
Whosoever thinks that God will not grant him victory in this world and the Hereafter, then let him extend his request by a mean to the heaven, then let him cut off and see whether this action the cause of his anger.*
As such, We have sent down clear signs, and God guides whomever He wishes.*
Those who acknowledge, the Jews, the Converts, the Nazarenes, the Zoroastrians, and those who have set up partners; God will separate between them on the day of Resurrection. For God is witness over all things.
Did you not see that to God submit what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and the sun and the moon and the stars and the mountains and the trees and what moves, and many people, and many who have deserved the retribution. Whoever God disgraces, then none can honor him. God does what He pleases.
Here are two opponents who have disputed regarding their Lord; as for those who rejected, outer garments made from fire are cut out for them, and boiling water is poured from above their heads.*
It melts the inside of their stomachs and their skin.
They will have hooked rods of iron.
Every time they want to escape the anguish, they are returned to it. Taste the retribution of the burning!
God will admit those who acknowledge and do good works to gardens with rivers flowing beneath them, wherein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearl, and their garments will be of silk.
They are guided to the good sayings, and guided to the path of the Praiseworthy.
Those who have rejected and repel from the path of God and the Restricted Temple that We have made for people, for the dweller or the visitor to it; and whoever inclines to evil action in it, We will let them taste a painful retribution.
We have appointed to Abraham the location of the sanctuary: "Do not set up anyone with Me, and purify My sanctuary for those who will partake, and those who will enforce, and those who kneel and prostrate."
Call out to people with the Pilgrimage, they will come to you walking and on every transport, they will come from every deep enclosure.
So that they may witness benefits for themselves and recall God's name in the appointed days over what He has provided for them of the animal livestock. So eat from it and feed the needy and the poor.
Then let them complete their duties and fulfill their vows, and let them partake at the ancient sanctuary.
Thus, and whosoever honors God's restrictions, then it is better for him with His Lord. The livestock is made lawful for you except what is recited upon you. So avoid the foulness of idols and avoid saying false statements.
Monotheists to God, not setting up anything with Him. Whosoever sets up partners with God, then it is as if he has fallen from the sky and the birds snatch him or the wind takes him to a place far off.
Thus, and whoever honors the decrees of God, then it is from the piety of the hearts.
In them are benefits to an appointed time, then their place is to the ancient sanctuary.
For every nation We have made a rite that they may mention God's name over what He has provided for them of the animal livestock. So your god is One god, so to Him peacefully surrender and give good tidings to those who obey.
Those who, when God is mentioned, their hearts revere, and they are patient to what befalls them, and they hold the contact prayer, and from what We provide them they spend.
The plump animals for offering, We have made them for you as decrees from God, in them is goodness for you. So mention God's name upon them while being orderly, so once their body becomes still, then eat from them and give food to the poor and the needy. It was thus that We have made them in service to you, that you may be thankful.
Neither their meat nor their blood reaches God, but what reaches Him is the righteousness from you. It was thus that He made them in service to you, so that you may glorify God for what He has guided you to, and give news to the good doers.*
God defends those who acknowledge. God does not like any betrayer, ingrate.
It is permitted for those who have been persecuted to fight. God is able to give them victory.
The ones who were driven out of their homes without justice, except that they said, "Our Lord is God!" If it were not for God defending people against themselves, then many places of gathering, markets, support centers, and temples where the name of God is frequently mentioned, would have been destroyed. God will give victory to those who support Him. God is Powerful, Noble.
Those whom if We allow them authority in the land, they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards betterment, and deter from evil. To God is the conclusion of all matters.
If they deny you, then denied also before them did the people of Noah and Aad and Thamud.
The people of Abraham and the people of Lot.
The dwellers of Midian; and Moses was denied. So I granted respite to the ingrates then I took them, how then was My punishment?
So how many a town have We destroyed while it was doing wrong, so that it is laying in ruins with its wells abandoned, and empty palaces.
Have they not roamed the land and had hearts with which to reason and ears with which to hear? No, it is not the sight which is blind, but it is the hearts that are in the chests that are blind.
They seek you to hasten the retribution; and God will not break His promise. A day with your Lord is like one thousand of the years you count.*
Many a town I have given it respite while it was doing wrong, then I seized it! To Me is the destiny.
Say, "O people, I am but a clear warner to you!"
As for those who acknowledge and do good work, for them is forgiveness and a great provision.
Those who seek to obstruct Our signs, those are the dwellers of hell.
We did not send before you any messenger or prophet, without having the devil interfere with his wishes. God then overrides what the devil has cast, and God secures His signs. God is Knower, Wise.*
That He may make what the devil has cast as a test for those who have a disease in their hearts and those whose hearts are hardened. The wicked are far away in opposition.
To let those who have been given knowledge know that it is the truth from your Lord, and they will acknowledge it, and their hearts will soften to it. God will guide those who acknowledge to a straight path.
Those who have rejected will remain in doubt from it until the moment comes to them suddenly, or the retribution will come to them on a day which will stand still.
The sovereignty on that day is to God, He will judge between them. So as for those who have acknowledged and did good works, they are in the gardens of Paradise.
Those who rejected and rejected Our signs, those will have a humiliating retribution.
Those who emigrated in the cause of God, then they were killed or died, God will provide them with a good provision, and God is the best of providers.
He will admit them an entrance that they will be pleased with, and God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate.
It is decreed that whoever retaliates with equal measure as was retaliated against him, then he was persecuted for this, God will give him victory. God is Pardoning, Forgiving.
That is because God merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. God is Hearer, Seer.
That is because God is the truth, and what they call on besides Him is falsehood. God is the High, the Great.
Did you not see that God sends down water from the sky, and then the land becomes green? God is Compassionate, Ever-aware.
To Him is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
Did you not see that God commits to you what is in the land, and the ships which sail in the sea by His leave? He holds the sky so that it would not collapse upon the earth, except by His leave. Indeed, God is Kind towards people, Compassionate.
He is the One who gave you life, then He makes you die, then He gives you life. But the human being is always rejecting!
For every nation We have made rites which they will fulfill. So do not let the matter fall into dispute. Call upon your Lord, for you are on a guidance which is straight.
If they argue with you, then say, "God is fully aware of what you do."
"God will judge between you on the day of Resurrection in what you dispute therein."
Did you not know that God knows what is in the heavens and the earth? All is in a record. All that for God is easy.
They serve besides God what He did not send any authority upon, and what they have no knowledge of. The wicked will not have any helper.
If Our clear signs are recited to them, you see hatred in the faces of those who have rejected. They are nearly close to attacking those who are reciting to them Our signs! Say, "Shall I inform you of what is worse than this? The fire, which God has promised to those who have rejected. What a miserable destiny!"
O people, an example is being cited so listen to it: those you call upon besides God will not create a fly even if they all gathered to do so. If the fly takes anything from them, they will not be able to return it from him. Weak is both the seeker and the sought!
They have truly underestimated God's power. God is Powerful, Noble.
God chooses messengers from amongst the angels and from amongst people. God is Hearer, Seer.
He knows their present and their future. To God all matters are returned.
O you who acknowledge, kneel and prostrate and serve your Lord and do good that you may succeed.
Strive in the cause of God properly. He is the One who has chosen you, and He has made no hardship for you in the system, the creed of your father Abraham; He is the One who named you 'those who have peacefully surrendered' from before as well as in this. So let the messenger be witness over you and you be witness over people. So hold the contact prayer and contribute towards betterment and hold tight to God, He is your patron. What an excellent Patron, and what an excellent Supporter.*
Those who acknowledge are indeed successful.
Those who are humble in their contact prayer.
They abstain from vain talk.
They are active towards betterment.
They guard their private parts.
Except around their mates, or those whom they have contractual rights, they are free from blame.*
But whosoever seeks anything beyond this, then these are the transgressors.
Those who are true to what they have been entrusted and their pledges.
Those who maintain their support.
These are the inheritors.
The ones who shall inherit Paradise, in it they will abide.
We have created people from an extract of clay.
Then We made him a seed in a safe lodging.
Then We created the seed into an embryo, then We created the embryo into a fetus, then We created the fetus into bone, then We covered the bone with flesh, then We brought forth a new creation. So glory be to God, the best of creators.*
Then after that, you will die.
Then you will be resurrected on the day of Resurrection.
We have created above you seven passageways, and We were never unaware of the creations.
We sent down from the sky water in due measure, then We let it reside in the land, and We are capable of taking it away.
So We brought forth for you gardens of palm trees and grapes, for which you will find many fruits and from it you will eat.
A tree which emerges from the mount of Sinai, it grows oil and is a relish for those who eat.
In the livestock are lessons for you. We give you to drink from what is in its bellies, and you have many other benefits from them, and of them you eat.
On them and on the ships you are carried.
We have sent Noah to his people, so he said, "O my people, serve God, and you have no other god besides Him. Will you not take heed?"
But the leaders who rejected from among his people said, "What is this but a human like you? He wants to make himself better than you! If it was indeed God's will, He would have sent down angels. We did not hear such a thing among our fathers of old."*
"He is no more than a man who has madness in him. So keep watch on him for a while."
He said, "My Lord, grant me victory for what they denied me."
So We inspired him: "Construct the Ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration. Then, when Our command comes and the volcano erupts, then you shall take on the Ship two from every pair, and your family; except for those of them upon whom the word has come. Do not address Me regarding those who have done wrong, for they will be drowned."*
So when you and those who are with you have embarked on the Ship, then say, "All praise is due to God who has saved us from the wicked people."
Say, "My Lord, cause me to embark upon a blessed place, for You are the best for those who embark."
In this are signs, and We will always test.
Then We rose after them a different generation.
So We sent a messenger to them from amongst them: "Serve God, you have no other god besides Him. Will you not take heed?"
The leaders from amongst his people who rejected and denied the meeting of the Hereafter; and We indulged them in this worldly life; said, "What is this but a human like you? He eats from what you eat and he drinks from what you drink."
"If you obey a human like you, then you will indeed be losers."
"Does he promise you that if you die and become dust and bones that you will be brought out?"
"Far fetched is what you are being promised."
"There is nothing but our worldly life, we die and we live, and we will not be resurrected."
"He is but a man who has invented a lie against God, and we will not acknowledge him."
He said, "My Lord, grant me victory for what they denied me."
He replied: "In a little while they will be in regret."
So the scream took them with justice, and We made them as dead plants. So away with the wicked people.
Then We rose after them different generations.
No nation can hasten its appointed time, nor can it delay.
Then We sent Our messengers in succession. Every time there came to a nation their messenger, they denied him. So We made them follow one another, and We made them history. So away with a people who do not acknowledge!
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron. With Our signs and a clear authority.
To Pharaoh and his leaders. But they became arrogant, for they were a high and mighty people.
So they said, "Shall we acknowledge two humans like us, while their people are servants to us?"
So they denied them, and they became of those who were destroyed.
We have given Moses the book, so that they may be guided.
We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We gave them refuge on high ground, a place for resting and with a flowing stream.
"O messengers, eat from what is good, and do righteous work. I am aware of what you do."
"This is your nation, one nation, and I am your Lord so be aware."
But the affair was disputed between them into segments. Every group happy with what it had.*
So leave them in their error until a time.
Do they not think why We are extending them with wealth and children?
We are quick to give them the good things. But they do not perceive.
As for those who are in reverence from the awareness of their Lord.
They acknowledge the signs of their Lord.
They do not set up anything with their Lord.
They give of what they were given, and their hearts are full of reverence that they will return to their Lord.
These are the ones who race in doing good, and they are the first to it.
We do not burden a person except with what it can bear. We have a record that speaks with the truth, they will not be wronged.
No, their hearts are unaware of this! They have deeds besides this which they are doing.
Until We take their carefree people with the retribution, then they will shout for help.
Do not shout for help today, for you will not be helped against Us.
My signs were recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels.
You were too proud from it, talking evil about it; and you defiantly disregarded it.
Did they not ponder the words, or has what come to them not come to their fathers of old?
Or did they not know their messenger? For they are in denial of him.
Or do they say that there is a madness in him? No, he has come to them with the truth, but most of them are hateful of the truth.
If the truth were to follow their desires, then the heavens and the earth and all who are in them would have been corrupted. No, We have come to them with their reminder, but from their reminder they are turning away.
Or do you ask them for a wage? The wage of your Lord is best, and He is the best of providers.
You are inviting them to a Straight Path.
Those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter, they are deviating away from the path.
If We were to have mercy on them and remove what distress was upon them, they would still return to persist in their transgression, wandering blindly.
When We seized them with the punishment, they did not humble themselves to their Lord nor did they invoke Him.
Until We open for them a door of immense retribution, then they become in sorrow and despair.
He is the One who established for you the hearing, and the sight, and the minds. Little do you give thanks.
He is the One who multiplied you on the earth, and to Him you will be returned.
He is the One who gives life and brings death, and to Him is the alteration of the night and the day. Do you not reason?
Indeed, they have said the same as what the people of old had said.
They said, "If we are dead and become dust and bones, will we then be resurrected?"
"We, as well as our fathers, have been promised this from before. This is nothing but the tales of the ancients."
Say, "To whom the earth is and whosoever is in it if you know?"*
They will say, "To God." Say, "Will you then not remember!"
Say, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the great dominion?"
They will say, "To God." Say, "Will you then not take heed?"
Say, "In whose hand is the sovereignty of all things, and He protects while there is no protector against Him, if you know?"
They will say, "To God." Say, "Then why are you deceived?"
In fact, We have come to them with the truth, and they are truly liars.
God has not taken a son, nor is there with Him any god. If it were so, then every god would have taken what He created and they would have tried to overtake each other. God be glorified against what they describe!
The knower of the unseen and the seen. Be He exalted above what they set up.
Say, "My Lord, if You show me what they are promised."
"My Lord, then do not leave me amongst the wicked people."
We are able to show you what We promise them.
Repel evil with what is better. We are better aware of what they describe.
Say, "My Lord, I seek refuge with you from the whispers of the devils."
"I seek refuge with you O Lord that they should come near."
Until death comes to one of them, he says: "My Lord, send me back."
"So that I may do good in what I have left behind." No, it is but a word he is speaking. There is a barrier to prevent them from going back until the day they are all resurrected.*
So when the horn is blown, then there will be no kinship between them on that day, nor will they ask for one another.
So, those whose weight is heavy on the scales, then those are the successful ones.
Those whose weight is light on the scales, those are the ones who lost themselves, in hell they will abide.
The fire will scorch their faces, and in it their grin will be with displaced lips.
"Were My signs not recited to you, then you denied them?"
They said, "Our Lord, our wickedness overcame us, and we were a misguided people."
"Our Lord, bring us out of it, and if we return to this then we are wicked."
He said, "Be humiliated therein and do not speak to Me."
There was a group from among My servants who used to say, "Our Lord, we have acknowledged, so forgive us, and have mercy upon us, for You are the best of those who show mercy."
But you mocked them, so much so that they made you forget My remembrance, and you used to laugh at them.
I have rewarded them today for their patience, they are indeed the winners.
Say, "How long have you stayed on earth in terms of years?"
They said, "We remained for a day, or for part of a day. So ask those who kept count."
He said, "You have remained for very little, if you knew."
"Did you think that We have created you without purpose, and that you would not return to Us?"
So, exalted is God, the true King, there is no god but He, the Lord of the supreme throne.
Whosoever calls on another god with God when he has no proof for such, then his judgment is with his Lord. The ingrates will never succeed.
Say, "My Lord, forgive and have mercy, and you are the best of those who are merciful."
A chapter which We have sent down and imposed, and We have sent down in it clear revelations that you may remember.
The adulteress and the adulterer, you shall lash each of them one hundred lashes, and do not let any pity take you over God's system if you acknowledge God and the Last Day. Let a group of the acknowledgers witness their punishment.*
The adulterer will only marry an adulteress or one who is an idolatress. The adulteress, she will only be married to an adulterer or an idolater. This has been forbidden for the acknowledgers.
Those who accuse the independent women and they do not bring forth four witnesses, then you shall lash them eighty lashes and do not ever accept their testimony. Those indeed are the evildoers;*
Except those who repent after this and do right, then God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Those who accuse their wives, but they have no witnesses except for themselves, then the testimony of one of them should be four testimony, swearing by God that he is being truthful.
The fifth shall be God's curse upon him if he is one of those lying.
The punishment will be averted from her if she testifies four times by God that he is of the liars.
The fifth shall be that God's curse is upon her if he is speaking the truth.
All this is from God's favor upon you and His mercy. God is Forgiving, Wise.
Those who have brought forth the false accusation were a group from within you. Do not think it is bad for you, for it is good for you. Every person amongst them will have what he deserves of the sin. As for he who had the greatest portion of it, he will have a great retribution.*
If only when you heard it the acknowledging men and women should have thought good of themselves and said: "This is an obvious lie!"
If only they had brought four witnesses to it. If they did not have the witnesses, then these with God are the liars.
Had it not been for God's favor upon you and His mercy upon you in this world and the Hereafter, a great retribution would have touched you for what you have spoken.
For you have cast it with your tongues, and you say with your mouths what you have no knowledge of, and you think it is a minor issue, while with God it was great.*
When you heard it you should have said: "It was not right for us to speak of this. Glory to You, this is a great lie."
God warns you not to repeat something similar to this ever, if you are acknowledgers.
God clarifies for you the revelations; and God is Knower, Wise.
As for those who enjoy that immorality spreads amongst those who have acknowledged, they will have a painful retribution in the world and the Hereafter. God knows while you do not know.
All this is from God's favor upon you and His mercy. God is Kind, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, do not follow the footsteps of the devil. Whosoever follows the footsteps of the devil should know that he advocates immorality and evil. Had it not been for God's favor upon you and His mercy, not one of you would have ever been purified, but God purifies whom He wishes, and God is Hearer, Knower.
Let not those amongst you who have been blessed with abundance refuse to give to the relatives, the needy, and those who have immigrated in the cause of God. Let them pardon and forgive. Would you not like God to forgive you? God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Those who accuse the independent, innocent, acknowledging women, they will be cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have a painful retribution.
On the day when their tongues, and their hands, and their feet will bear witness against them for what they used to do.
On that day, God will pay them what they are owed in full, and they will know that God is the Truth Manifested.
The wicked women are for the wicked men, and the wicked men are for the wicked women, and the good women are for the good men. The good men are for the good women. These people are innocent from what statements have been made, and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision.
O you who acknowledge, do not enter any homes except your own unless you are invited and you greet the people in them. This is best for you, perhaps you will remember.
But, if you do not find anyone in them then do not enter until you are given permission. If you are told to go back, then return for it is purer for you. God is aware of what you do.
There is no sin upon you that you enter homes which are abandoned if in them there are belongings of yours. God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
Tell the acknowledging men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts, for that is purer for them. God is fully aware of what you do.*
Tell the acknowledging women to lower their gaze and guard their private parts, and that they should not show off their attraction except what is apparent, and let them cast their clothes over their cleavage. Let them not show off their attraction except to their husbands, or their fathers, or fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their children that come after them, or those who are still their dependants, or the male servants who are without need, or the child who has not yet understood the nakedness of women. Let them not strike with their feet in a manner that reveals what they are keeping hidden of their attraction. Repent to God, all of you acknowledgers, so that you may succeed.*
Marry off those among you that are single/widow, and the reformed ones from among your male and female servants. If they are poor, then God will grant them from His grace. God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable.*
Let those who are not able to marry continue to be chaste until God enriches them of His Bounty. If those whom you have over them contractual rights seek release, then release them if you find that they are ready, and give them from the wealth of God which He has bestowed upon you. Do not force your daughters into marriage when they have desired independence, in order that you may make a gain in the goods of this worldly life. But if anyone has compelled them, then considering their compulsion, God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
We have sent down to you clarifying revelations and an example of those who came before you and a lesson for the righteous.
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His light is like a concave mirror within a lamp, the lamp is within a glass, the glass is like a radiant planet, which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is neither of the east nor of the west, its oil nearly radiates light even if not touched by fire. Light upon light. God guides to His light those whom He pleases. God sets forth parables for mankind; God is aware of all things.*
In houses that God has allowed to be raised and His name is mentioned in them. He is glorified therein morning and evening.
People who are not distracted by trade or sale from the remembrance of God, holding the contact prayers, and contributing towards betterment. They fear a day when the hearts and sight will be overturned.
God will reward them for the best of what they did, and He will increase them from His grace. God provides for whom He pleases without any price.
As for those who reject, their works are like a mirage in the desert. A thirsty person thinks it is water, until he reaches it, he finds it is nothing; he finds God there and He pays him his due, and God is swift in judgment.
Or like the darkness out in a deep ocean in the midst of violent waves, with waves upon waves and dark clouds. Darkness upon darkness, if he brings out his own hand, he could barely see it. For whomever God does not make a light, he will have no light.
Do you not see that everything in the heavens and the earth, even the birds in formation, glorifies God? Each knows its contact prayer and its glorification. God is fully aware of everything they do.
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and to God is the final destiny.
Do you not see that God drives the clouds, then He gathers them together, then He piles them upon each other, then you see the soft rain coming out of them? He sends down hail from the sky from the mountains to afflict whomever He wills, and He diverts it from whomever He wills; the brightness of the snow almost blinds the eyes.
God rotates the night and the day. In that is a lesson for those who have insight.
God created every moving creature from water. So some of them move on their bellies, and some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. God creates whatever He wills. God is capable of all things.*
We have sent down to you clarifying revelations, and God guides whoever He wills to a straight path.
They say: "We acknowledge God and the messenger, and we obey," but a group of them turn away after that. These are not acknowledgers.
If they are invited to God and His messenger to judge between them, a party of them turn away.
However, if the judgment is in their favor, they come to it willingly with submission!
Is there a disease in their hearts, or are they doubtful? Or do they fear that God and His messenger would wrong them in the judgment? In fact, they are the wrong doers.
The utterance of those who acknowledge when they are invited to God and His messenger to judge in their affairs is to say: "We hear and obey." These are the winners.
Whosoever obeys God and His messenger, and reverences God and is aware of Him, then these are the winners.
They swear by God with their strongest oaths that if you would only command them they would mobilize. Say: "Do not swear, for obedience is an obligation. God is Ever-aware of what you do."
Say: "Obey God, and obey the messenger." But if they turn away, then he is only responsible for his obligation, and you are responsible for your obligations. If you obey him, you will be guided. The messenger is only required to deliver clearly.
God promises those among you who acknowledge and do good works, that He will make them successors on earth, as He made successors of those before them, He will enable for them their system which He has approved for them, and He will substitute security for them in place of fear, that they serve Me and do not associate anything with Me. As for those who reject after that, they are the transgressors.
Hold the contact prayer and contribute towards betterment, and obey the messenger, that you may attain mercy.
Do not think that those who reject will remain in the land. Their abode is Hell. What a miserable destiny!
O you who acknowledge, let those whom are under your contract and have not yet attained puberty request your permission regarding three times: Before the dawn contact prayer, and when you take off your attire from the heat of the noon, and after the dusk contact prayer. These are three private times for you. Other than these times, it is not wrong for you or them to intermingle with one another. God thus clarifies the revelations for you. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.*
When the children among you reach puberty, then let permission be sought from them like it was sought from those before them. God thus clarifies His revelations for you. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
The women who are past child bearing and who do not seek to get married have no sin upon them if they put-off their garments, provided they do not display their attraction. If they remain as they were, then it is better for them. God is Hearer, Knower.
There is no blame upon the blind, nor is there any blame upon the crippled, nor is there any blame upon the ill, nor is there any blame upon yourselves, if you eat at your homes, or the homes of your fathers, or the homes of your mothers, or the homes of your brothers, or the homes of your sisters, or the homes of your uncles, or the homes of your aunts, or the homes of your mothers' brothers, or the homes of your mothers' sisters, or those to which you possess their keys, or that of your friends. You commit nothing wrong by eating together or as individuals. When you enter any home, you shall greet each other a greeting from God that is blessed and good. God thus explains the revelations for you that you may reason.*
The acknowledgers are those who acknowledge God and His messenger, and when they are with him in a meeting, they do not leave him without permission. Those who ask permission are the ones who do acknowledge God and His messenger. If they ask your permission, in order to tend to some of their affairs, you may grant permission to whomever you wish, and ask God to forgive them. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Do not let the invitation of the messenger between you be as if you are inviting each other. God is fully aware of those among you who slip away under lame excuses. Let those who oppose his command beware, for an ordeal may strike them, or a severe retribution.*
Certainly, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, He knows what your condition is; and on the day when they are returned to Him, He will inform them of everything they had done. God is aware of all things.
Blessed is the One who sent down the Statute Book to His servant, so he can be a warner to the world.
The One who has the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; He did not take a son, and He does not have any partner in kingship. He created everything and measured it precisely.*
They took besides Him gods who do not create anything and are themselves created! They do not possess for themselves any harm or benefit, nor do they possess death or life, nor resurrection.*
Those who rejected said, "This is but a falsehood that he invented and other people have helped him with it; for they have come with what is wrong and fabricated."
They said, "Mythologies of the ancient people; he wrote them down while they were being dictated to him morning and evening."*
Say, "It was sent down by the One who knows the secrets in the heavens and the earth. He is always Forgiving, Compassionate."*
They said, "What is with this messenger that he eats the food and walks in the market places? If only an angel were sent down to him so that he would jointly be a warner."
"Or that a treasure is given to him, or that he has a paradise that he eats from." The wicked said, "You are but following a man bewitched!"
See how they cited the examples for you, for they have strayed, and they cannot find a path.
Blessed is the One who if He wishes can make for you better than that. Paradises with rivers flowing beneath them, and He will make for you palaces.
But they have denied the moment, and We have prepared for those who deny the moment a flaming fire.
When it sees them from a far place, they hear its raging and roaring.
When they are cast into it from a tight crevice, in chains, they call out their remorse.
Do not call out one remorse today, but call out many remorses.
Say, "Is that better or the Paradise of eternity that the righteous have been promised?" It is their reward and destiny.
In it they will have what they wish eternally. It is upon your Lord an obligated promise.
On the day when We gather them together with what they served besides God; then He will say, "Did you misguide My servants here, or did they stray from the path?"
They said, "Glory be to You, it was not for us to take besides You any allies; indeed You gave them and their fathers luxury until they forgot the remembrance, and they were a lost people."
They have refuted what you claimed, so you will not find any excuse nor any victor. Whosoever has done wrong among you, We will let him taste a great retribution.
We have not sent before you any messengers except that they ate the food and walked in the market places. We have made some of you as a trial for others to see if you will have patience. Your Lord was ever seeing.
Those who do not expect to meet Us said, "If only the angels were sent down upon him, or that we see our Lord." They have become arrogant in themselves, and they have produced a great blasphemy!
On the day they see the angels, that is not good news for the criminals. They will say, "Away to a place that is sealed off."
We turned to the works that they did, and We made it dust in the wind.
The dwellers of Paradise on that day are in the best abode and the best destiny.
The day when the sky will be filled with clouds, and the angels will be sent down in succession.
The true kingship on that day will be to the Gracious. It is a day which will be very hard on the ingrates.
That day the wrongdoer will bite on his hand and say, "I wish I had taken the path with the messenger!"
"Woe unto me, I wish I did not take so and so as a friend!"
"He has misguided me from the remembrance after it came to me, and the devil was always a betrayer of people!"
The messenger said, "My Lord, my people have deserted this Quran."*
It is such that We make for every prophet enemies from among the criminals. Your Lord suffices as a Guide and a Victor.*
Those who rejected said, "If only the Quran was sent down to him in one go!" It was done as such so We could strengthen your heart with it, and We arranged it accordingly.
For every example they come to you with, We bring you the truth and the best explanation.
Those who will be gathered to hell on their faces, these are the most evil and the most strayed from the path.
We gave Moses the book and We made his brother Aaron a minister with him.
So We said, "Go both of you to the people who have denied Our signs." So We then destroyed them utterly.
The people of Noah, when they denied the messengers We drowned them, and We made them a lesson for people. We have prepared for the wicked a painful retribution.
And Aad, Thamud, the dwellers of Al-Raas, and many generations in between.
For each We cited the examples, and each We destroyed utterly.
They have come upon the town that was showered with a miserable shower. Did they not see it? No, they do not expect any resurrection.
If they see you they take you for a mockery: "Is this the one that God sent as a messenger?"
"He nearly diverted us from our gods had we not been patient for them." When they see the retribution, they will learn who is on a path most astray.
Have you seen the one who has taken his ego as his god? Will you be a caretaker over him?
Or do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are just like cattle. No, they are worse off.
Did you not see to your Lord how He casts the shadow? If He wished, He could have made it still, then We would have made the sun as a guide to it.
Then We retract it to us a simple retraction.
He is the One who made for you the night as a cover, sleep for resting, and He made the day to move about in.*
He is the One who sent the winds to spread between the hands of His mercy. We sent down from the sky water which is pure.
So that We can revive a dead land with it and We supply drink for many what we created; the livestock and people.
We have distributed it amongst them so that they may remember, but most people refuse to be anything but ingrates.
If We wish, We could send to every town a warner.*
So do not obey the ingrates, and strive against them with it in a great striving.
He is the One who merges the two bodies of water. This is fresh and palatable and this is salty and bitter. He made between them a partition and an inviolable barrier.*
He is the One who created a human being from the water, so He made for him blood kin and mates. Your Lord is Omnipotent.
They serve besides God what does not benefit them nor harm them. The ingrate is always set against his Lord.
We have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner.
Say, "I do not ask you for a wage; but for whoever chooses to make a path to his Lord."
Put your trust in the Eternal Who does not die, and glorify His praise. It is enough for Him that He is Ever-aware in the sins of His servants.
The One who created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days, then He settled to the throne. The Gracious; so ask Him for He is Ever-aware.*
If they are told: "Prostrate to the Gracious." They say, "What is the Gracious? Shall we prostrate to what you order us?" It increases their aversion.*
Blessed is the One Who made towers in the universe and He made in it a beacon and a shining moon.
He is the One Who made the night and the day in succession, for those who wish to remember or wish to be thankful.
The servants of the Gracious who walk on the earth in humility and if the ignorant speak to them, they say, "Peace."
Those who stay awake for their Lord, in prostration and standing.
Those who say, "Our Lord, avert from us the retribution of hell. Its retribution is terrible."
"It is a miserable abode and dwelling."
Those who when they give they are not excessive nor stingy, but they are in a measure between that.
Those who do not call on any other god with God, nor do they kill the life that God has made forbidden except in justice, nor do they commit adultery; and whosoever does that will receive the punishment.
The retribution will be doubled for him on the day of Judgment and he will abide in it eternally in disgrace.
Except for the one who repents and acknowledges and does good work, for those God will replace their sins with good; God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
Whosoever repents, and does good, then he shall repent towards God a true repentance.
Those who do not bear false witness, and if they pass by vain talk they pass by with dignity.
Those who when they are reminded of their Lord's signs, they do not fall on them deaf and blind.
Those who say, "Our Lord, grant us from our mates and our progeny what will be the comfort of our eyes, and make us role models for the righteous."
These will be rewarded with a dwelling for what they have been patient for, and they will find in it a greeting and peace.
In it they will abide, what an excellent dwelling and position.
Say, "My Lord would not care about you except for your imploring. But you have denied, so it will be your destiny."
T9S60M40*
These are the signs of the manifest/clarifying book.
Perhaps you are grieving yourself that they do not acknowledge.
If We wish, We could send down for them from the heavens a sign, to which they would bend their necks in humility.
Not a new reminder comes to them from the Gracious, except that they turn away from it.
They have denied, thus the news will come to them of what they used to ridicule.
Did they not look to the earth, how many plants have We raised in it, from each a good pair.
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
When your Lord called Moses: "Go to the people who are wicked."
"The people of Pharaoh. Will they not be righteous?"
He said, "My Lord, I fear that they would deny me."
"My chest would become tight, and my tongue would not be able to express; so send for Aaron."
"They have charges of a crime against me, so I fear they will kill me."
He said, "It will not be. Go both of you with Our signs. I am with you listening."
"So both of you go to Pharaoh and say, 'We are messengers of the Lord of the worlds'"*
"'So send with us the Children of Israel'"
He said, "Did we not raise you amongst us as a newborn, and you stayed with us for many of your years?"
"You did what deed you did, and you are of the ingrates."
He said, "I did it, and I was of those misguided."
"So I ran away from you all when I feared you. So my Lord granted me judgment, and made me of the messengers."
"That was a favor that you held against me, so you could continue to enslave the Children of Israel."
Pharaoh said, "What is the Lord of the worlds?"*
He said, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you are aware."
He said to those around him: "Do you hear that?"
He said, "Your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers!"
He said, "This messenger of yours who has been sent to you is mad!"
He said, "The Lord of the east and the west, and what is between them, if you understand."
He said, "If you take a god other than me, then I will put you among the prisoners."
He said, "What if I brought you proof?"
He said, "Then bring it forth if you are of the truthful ones."
So he cast his staff, then it manifested into a serpent.
He drew out his hand, then it became white to the onlookers.
He said to the commanders around him: "This is a knowledgeable magician."
"He wants to bring you out of your land with his magic. So what will you decide?"
They said, "Delay him and his brother, and send people in the cities to gather."
"They will come to you with every knowledgeable magician."
So the magicians were gathered to an appointed day.
It was said to the people: "Will you also gather?"
"Perhaps we can follow the magicians if they are the winners."
So when the magicians came, they said to Pharaoh: "We should be rewarded if we are the winners."
He said, "Yes, and you shall also be near to me."
Moses said to them: "Cast down what it is you will cast."
So they cast down their ropes and staffs and they said, "By the might of Pharaoh, we will be the winners."
So whenever Moses cast down his staff, it ate up all that they showed!
So the magicians went down prostrating.
They said, "We acknowledge the Lord of the worlds!"
"The Lord of Moses and Aaron."
He said, "Have you acknowledged him before I permitted you? He is surely your great one who has taught you magic. So you shall come to know. I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides, and I will crucify you all."
They said, "There is no worry, for we are all returning to our Lord."
"We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, as we are the first to acknowledge."
We inspired Moses: "Take away My servants, for you will be followed."
So Pharaoh sent gatherers to the cities.
"These are but a small band."
"They have done what has enraged us."
"We are all gathered and forewarned."
So, We evicted them out of gardens and springs.
Treasures and an honorable dwelling.
As such, We gave it to the Children of Israel.
So they were pursued at sunrise.
But when the two groups saw each other, the companions of Moses said, "We are caught!"
He said, "No, my Lord is with me and He will guide me."
So We inspired to Moses: "Strike the sea with your staff." So it split into two, each side like a great mountain.
We then brought them to the other side.
We saved Moses and all those with him.
Then We drowned the others.
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
Recite to them the news of Abraham.
When he said to his father and his people: "What do you serve?"
They said, "We serve statues, thus we remain devoted to them."
He said, "Do they hear you when you pray to them?"
"Or do they benefit you or harm you?"
They said, "No, but we found our fathers doing the same."
He said, "Do you see what you have been serving."
"You and your fathers of old."
"They are enemies to me, except for the Lord of the worlds."
"The One who created me, He will guide me."
"He is the One who feeds me and gives me drink."
"If I am sick, He is the One who cures me."
"The One who will make me die and then bring me to life."
"The One whom I hope will forgive my faults on the day of Judgment."
"My Lord, grant me authority and join me with the good doers."
"Give me a tongue that is true for those who will follow."
"Make me of the inheritors of the gardens of bliss."
"Forgive my father, for he was of those misguided."
"Do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected."
"The day when no money or children can help."
"Except for he who comes to God with a pure heart."
Paradise was made near for the righteous.
Hell was displayed for the wrongdoers.
It was said to them: "Where is what you used to serve?"
"Without God, can they help you or help themselves?"
So they were thrown in it on their faces, them and the wrongdoers.
As well as all the soldiers of Satan.
They said, while they were disputing therein:
"By God, we were clearly misguided."
"For we equated you with the Lord of the Worlds!"
"None misled us except the criminals."
"So we have none to intercede for us."
"Nor a close friend."
"If only we could have another chance, we would be among those who acknowledge."
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
The people of Noah rejected the messengers.
When their brother Noah said to them: "Will you not be righteous?"
"I am to you a trustworthy messenger."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"I do not ask you for a wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
They said, "Shall we acknowledge you when the lowest type of people have followed you?"
He said, "What knowledge do I have of what they used to do?"
"Their judgment is on my Lord, if you could know."
"I will not drive away those who acknowledge."
"I am but a clear warner."
They said, "If you do not cease, O Noah, you will be among those who are stoned."
He said, "My Lord, my people have denied me!"
"So open between me and them a rift, and save me and those who are with me of those who acknowledge."
So We saved him and those who were with him in the charged Ship.
Then after that We drowned the rest.
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
Aad denied the messengers.
For their brother Hood said to them: "Will you not be righteous?"
"I am to you a clear messenger."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"I do not ask you for a wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds."
"Do you build on every high place a symbol, for the sake of vanity!"
"You take for yourselves strongholds, perhaps you will live forever?"
"If you attack, you strike ruthlessly?"
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"Be aware of the One who provided you with what you know."
"He provided you with livestock and shelters."
"Gardens and springs."
"I fear for you the retribution of a great day"
They said, "It is the same whether you preach or do not preach."
"This is nothing but an invention by the people of old."
"We are not going to be punished."
So they denied him, and We destroyed them. In that is a sign, but most do not acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
Thamud denied the messengers.
For their brother Saleh said to them: "Will you not be righteous?"
"I am to you a clear messenger."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"I do not ask you for a wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds."
"Will you be left secure in what you have here?"
"In gardens and springs."
"Green crops and palm trees laden with fruit."
"You carve homes out of the mountains with great skill?"
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"Do not obey the command of the carefree."
"The ones who corrupt in the land and are not reformers."
They said, "You are but one of those bewitched!"
"You are but a human being like us. So bring a sign if you are of the truthful ones."
He said, "This is a female camel which will have to drink and you will drink on a different day."*
"Do not afflict her with harm, else the retribution of a great day will seize you."
But they slaughtered her, and they became regretful.
So the retribution took them. In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
The people of Lot denied the messengers.
For their brother Lot said to them: "Will you not be righteous?"
"I am to you a trustworthy messenger."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"I do not ask you for a wage for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds."
"Are you attracted to the males of the worlds?"
"You leave what your Lord has created for you of mates? You are an intrusive people!"
They said, "If you do not cease O Lot, you will be among those driven out."
He said, "I am in severe opposition to your acts!"
"My Lord, save me and my family from what they do."
So We saved him and his entire family.
Except for an old woman who remained.
Then We destroyed the others.
We rained upon them a rain. Miserable was the rain to those who had been warned.
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
That your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
The dwellers of the Woods rejected the messengers.
For Shuayb said to them: "Will you not be righteous?"
"I am to you a trustworthy messenger."
"So be aware of God and obey me."
"I do not ask you for a wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds."
"Give full measure and do not be of those who cause losses."
"Weigh with the balance that is straight."
"Do not defraud the people of their belongings, and do not venture into the land corrupting."
"Be aware of the One who created you and the generations of old."
They said, "You are but one of those bewitched."
"You are nothing but a human being like us, and we think you are one of those who lie."
"So let pieces from the sky fall upon us if you are of those who are truthful!"
He said, "My Lord is most aware of what you do."
But they denied him, so the retribution of the day of shadow took them. It was the retribution of a terrible day.
In that is a sign, but most of them are not those who acknowledge.
Your Lord is the Noble, the Compassionate.
This is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
It was sent down with the trusted Spirit.
Upon your heart, so that you would be of the warners.
In a clear Arabic tongue.
It is in the Psalms of old.
Was it not a sign for them that the scholars of the Children of Israel knew it?
Had We sent it down upon some of the foreigners,
He related it to them; they would not have acknowledged it.
As such, We diverted it from the hearts of the criminals.
They do not acknowledge it until they see the painful retribution.
So it will come to them suddenly, while they do not perceive it.
Then they would say, "Can we be given more time?"
Was it not their wish that Our punishment be hastened?
Do you see that if We gave them luxury for years.
Then what they were promised came to them.
The luxury they were given will not avail them.
We have not destroyed any town except after having warners.
By way of a reminder, and We were never unjust.
It is not the devils that have brought this down.
Nor would they, nor could they.
They are blocked from overhearing.
So do not call upon any other god with God, else you will be with those punished.
Warn your closest kin.
Lower your wing for any who follow you of those who acknowledge.
Then if they disobey you, then say, "I am innocent from what you do."
Put your trust in the Noble, the Compassionate.
The One who sees you when you stand.
Your movements amongst those who prostrate.
He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
Shall I inform you on whom the devils descend?
They descend on every sinful liar.
They claim to listen, but most of them are liars.
The poets, are followed by the strayers.
Do you not see that they traverse in every valley?
That what they say, is not what they do?
Except for those who acknowledge, and do good works, and remember God greatly, and were victorious after they were wronged. As for those who did wrong, they will know which fate they will meet.
T9S60. These are the signs of the Quran and a clear book.*
A guide and good news to those who acknowledge.
Those who hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, and regarding the Hereafter they are certain.
As for those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter, We have made their work appear pleasing to them, so they walk around blind.
They will have the worst retribution, and in the Hereafter they are the biggest losers.
You are receiving the Quran from One who is Wise, Knowledgeable.
Moses said to his family: "I have seen a fire, I will bring you from there some news or I will bring you a burning piece so that you may be warmed."
So when he came to it he was called: "Blessed is the One at the fire and whoever is around it, and glory be to God, the Lord of the worlds."
"O Moses, it is I, God, the Noble, the Wise."
"Throw down your staff." So when he saw it vibrated as if it were a Jinni, he ran away and would not turn back. "O Moses, do not fear, for My messengers shall have no fear from Me."
"Except one who transgresses. But then if he replaces the evil deed with good, then I am Forgiving, Compassionate."
"Place your hand into your pocket; it will come out white with no blemish, one of nine signs to Pharaoh and his people."
So when Our signs came to them for all to see, they said, "This is clearly magic!"
They rejected them; they justified transgression and arrogance for themselves. So see how it ended for the wicked.
We bestowed upon David and Solomon knowledge, and they both said, "Praise be to God who preferred us over many of His acknowledging servants."
Solomon inherited from David, and he said, "O people, we have been taught how to understand the speech of creatures that fly, and we have been given from everything. This is indeed an evident grace."
Solomon's soldiers were gathered, comprising of humans and Jinn and birds, for they were to be spread out.
Until they came to a valley of ants, a female ant said, "O ants, enter your homes else you will be crushed by Solomon and his soldiers while they do not notice."*
He then smiled, amused by what she said. He said, "My Lord, help me to be thankful for the blessings You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I may do good work that pleases You, and admit me by Your Compassion with Your righteous servants."
He inspected the birds, then said, "Why do I not see the hoopoe, or is he among those absent?"
"I will punish him severely, or I will kill him, else he should have a clear excuse."
But the hoopoe did not stay away long, then he said, "I have seen what you do not know, and I have come to you from Sheba with news which is certain."
"I found them owned by a woman, and she was given all possession, and she had a great throne."
"I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of God! The devil had made their work appear good to them, so he kept them away from the path, for they are not being guided."*
"Will they not prostrate to God who brings out what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you declare?"
"God, there is no god but He, the Lord of the great throne."
He said, "We will see if you are being truthful or are one of those who lie."
"Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then withdraw from them and observe what they respond with."
She said, "O commanders, a noble letter has been delivered to me."
"It is from Solomon, and it reads: In the name of God, the Gracious, the Compassionate"*
""Do not be arrogant toward me and come to me peacefully surrendering""*
She said, "O commanders, advise me in this matter of mine, for I will not take a decision until you give testimony."
They said, "We are people of strength and mighty in power. But the decision is yours, so see what you will command."
She said, "When the kings enter a town they destroy it and make its most noble people humiliated. It is such that they do."*
"I will send to them a gift, then I will see with what the messengers will return."
So when they came to Solomon he said, "Are you providing me with wealth? What God has provided for me is far better than what He has given you. Now you are happy with your gift!"
"Return to them. For we shall come to them with soldiers the like of which they have never seen, and we will drive them out humiliated, while they are feeble."
He said, "O commanders, which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me peacefully surrendering?"
A powerful being from among the Jinn said, "I will bring it to you before you rise from your station. For I am strong and trustworthy."
One who had knowledge from the book said, "I will bring it to you before you blink." So when he saw it resting before him, he said, "This is from the grace of my Lord, so that He tests me whether I am thankful or whether I reject. As for he who is thankful, he is thankful for himself, and as for he who rejects, then my Lord is Rich, Bountiful."
He said, "Disguise her throne so we may see if she will be guided or if she will be of those who are not guided."
So when she came, it was said, "Is your throne like this?" She said, "It appears to be similar." We were given knowledge before her, and we had peacefully surrendered.
She was prevented by what she served besides God. She was of the people who were ingrates.
It was said to her: "Enter the palace." So when she saw it she thought there was a pool, and she uncovered her legs. He said, "It is a palace paved with crystal." She said, "My Lord, I have wronged myself; and I peacefully surrender with Solomon to God, the Lord of the worlds."
We have sent to Thamud their brother Saleh: "You shall serve God." But they became two disputing groups.
He said, "My people, why do you hasten with evil ahead of good? If you would only seek God's forgiveness, perhaps you will receive mercy."
They said, "You have an ill omen with you and those with you." He said, "Your ill omen is with God, but you are a people that are being tested."
In the city were nine thugs who were causing corruption in the land, and they were not reforming.
They said, "Swear by God to one another that we will attack him and his family at night, and we will then say to his supporters: 'We did not witness who murdered his family, and we are being truthful.'"
They plotted a scheme and We plotted a scheme, while they did not notice.
So see what the result of their planning was! We destroyed them and their people together.
So these are their homes, ruined, for what they transgressed. In that is a sign for a people who know.
We saved those who acknowledged and were righteous.
And Lot, when he said to his people: "Are you committing lewdness while you can clearly see?"
"You are approaching the men out of lust instead of the women! No, you are an ignorant people!"
But the reply of his people was that they said, "Expel the family of Lot from your town, for they are a people who are being pure!"
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife, for We found her to be of those who will remain.
We rained down a rain upon them. Miserable was the rain of those warned.
Say, "Praise be to God, and peace be upon His servants whom He has selected." Is God better, or what you set up?
The One who created the heavens and the earth, and He sent down water from the sky for you, so We cause gardens to grow with it that are full of beauty. It is not your ability to cause the growth of its trees. Is there a god with God? No. But they are a people who ascribe equals!
The One who made the earth a habitat, and He made in it rivers and He made for it stabilizers, and He made between the two seas a barrier. Is there a god with God? No. But most of them do not know.
The One who answers the distressed when he calls Him, and He removes the evil, and He makes you successors on earth. Is there a god with God? Little do you remember!
The One who guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea, and He sends the winds to spread between the hands of His mercy. Is there a god with God? God be exalted above what they set up!
The One who initiates the creation then He returns it, and He provides for you from the sky and the land. Is there a god with God? Say, "Bring your proof if you are being truthful."
Say, "None in the heavens or the earth know the unseen except God. They do not perceive when they will be resurrected."
No, they have no knowledge of the Hereafter. No, they are in doubt regarding it. No, they are blind to it.*
Those who rejected said, "When we have become dust, as our fathers, shall we be brought out?"
"We have been promised this, both us and our fathers before. This is nothing but tales of the ancients!"
Say, "Roam the earth and see what the end of the criminals was."
Do not be saddened for them, and do not be distraught for what they plot.
They say, "When is this promise if you are truthful?"
Say, "You may already be being followed by some of what you hasten."
Your Lord has made favors for people, but most of them are not thankful.
Your Lord knows what is concealed in their chests and what they reveal.
There is not a thing hidden in the heavens or the earth, but is in a clear record.
This Quran narrates to the Children of Israel most of what they are in dispute over.
It is a guidance and mercy for those who acknowledge.
Your Lord decides between them by His judgment. He is the Noble, the Knowledgeable.
So put your trust in God, for you are clearly on the truth.
You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and flee.
Nor can you guide the blind from their misguidance. You can only make those who acknowledge Our signs hear you, for they have peacefully surrendered.
When the punishment has been deserved by them, We will bring out for them a creature made of earthly material, it will speak to them that the people have been unaware regarding Our signs.*
The day We gather from every nation a party that denied Our signs, then they will be driven.
Until they have come, He will say, "Have you denied My signs while you had no explicit knowledge of them? What were you doing?"*
The punishment was deserved by them for what they transgressed, for they did not speak.
Did they not see that We made the night for them to rest in, and the day to see in? In that are signs for a people who have faith.
On the day when the horn is blown, then those in the heavens and the earth will be in terror except for whom God wills. All shall come to Him humbled.
You see the mountains, you think they are solid, while they are passing by like the clouds. The making of God who perfected everything. He is Ever-aware of what you do.*
Whoever comes with a good deed will receive better than it, and from the terror of that day they will be safe.
Whoever comes with the bad deed, their faces will be cast in hell. Are you not being rewarded for what you used to do?
"I have been ordered to serve the Lord of this town that He has made restricted, and to Him are all things, and I have been ordered to be of those who peacefully surrender."
"That I recite the Quran." He who is guided is guided for himself, and to he who is misguided, say, "I am but one of the warners."
Say, "Praise be to God, He will show you His signs and you will know them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do."*
T9S60M40.*
These are the signs of the clear book.
We recite to you from the news of Moses and Pharaoh with truth, for a people who acknowledge.
Pharaoh became mighty in the land, and he turned its people into factions, he oppressed a group of them by killing their children and shaming their women. He was of those who corrupted.
We wanted to help those who were oppressed in the land, and to make them role models, and to make them the inheritors.
To enable them in the land, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their troops what they had feared.
We inspired to Moses' mother: "Suckle him, and when you become fearful for him, then cast him off in the sea, and do not fear nor grieve. We will return him to you and We will make him of the messengers."
Then the family of Pharaoh picked him up, so he would be an enemy to them and a source of sadness. Certainly, Pharaoh and Haman and their troops were doing wrong.
Pharaoh's wife said, "A pleasure to my eye and yours, so do not kill him, perhaps he will benefit us or we may take him as a son!", while they did not perceive.
Moses' mother's heart became anxious, that she nearly revealed her identity. But We strengthened her heart, so that she would be of those who acknowledge.
She said to his sister: "Follow his path." So she watched him from afar, while they did not notice.
We forbade him from accepting all the nursing mothers. Then his sister said, "Shall I lead you to a family that can nurse him for you, and take good care of him?"
Thus, We returned him to his mother, so that she may be pleased and not be saddened, and to let her know that God's promise is the truth. However, most of them do not know.
When he reached his maturity and strength, We bestowed him with wisdom and knowledge. We thus reward the good doers.
He entered the city unexpectedly, without being noticed by the people. He found in it two men who were fighting, one was from his own race, and the other was from his enemy's. So the one who was from his own race called on him for help against his enemy, whereby Moses punched him, killing him. He said, "This is from the work of the devil; he is an enemy that clearly misleads."
He said, "My Lord, I have wronged my person, so forgive me." He then forgave him, for He is the Forgiver, the Compassionate.
He said, "My Lord, for what blessings you have bestowed upon me, I will never be a supporter of the criminals."
So he spent the night in the city, afraid and watchful. Then the one who sought his help yesterday, was asking again for his help. Moses said to him: "You are clearly a trouble maker."
But when he was about to strike their common enemy, he said, "O Moses, do you want to kill me, as you killed that person yesterday? Obviously, you wish to be a tyrant on earth; you do not wish to be of the righteous."
A man came running from the far side of the city, saying: "O Moses, the commanders are plotting to kill you, so leave immediately. I am giving you good advice."
He exited the city, afraid and watchful. He said, "My Lord, save me from the wicked people."
As he traveled towards Midyan, he said, "Perhaps my Lord will guide me to the right path."
When he arrived at the watering hole of Midyan, he found a crowd of people watering. He noticed two women waiting on the side. He said, "What is holding you back." They said, "We cannot draw water until the shepherds finish, and our father is an old man."
So he drew water for them, then he turned to a shaded area, and he said, "My Lord, I am poor, lacking any provisions You may have sent down."
So one of the two women approached him, shyly, and said, "My father invites you to reward you for watering for us." So when he came to him, and told him his story, he said, "Do not fear, for you have been saved from the wicked people."
One of the two women said, "O my father, hire him. For the best to be hired is one who is strong and honest."
He said, "I wish you to marry one of my two daughters, on condition that you work for me through eight pilgrimage periods; if you complete them to ten, it will be voluntary on your part. I do not wish to make this matter too difficult for you. You will find me, God willing, of the righteous."
He said, "It is then an agreement between me and you. Whichever period I fulfill, you will not be averse to either one. God is entrusted over what we said."
So when Moses fulfilled his obligation, he was traveling with his family and he saw a fire from the slope of the mount. He said to his family: "Stay here. I have seen a fire. Perhaps I can bring to you news from there, or a portion of the fire to warm you."
When he reached it, he was called from the tree at the edge of the right side of the valley on blessed ground: "O Moses, it is Me, God, the Lord of the worlds."
"Now, throw down your staff." So when he saw it vibrate as if it were a Jinni, he turned around to flee and would not return. "O Moses, come forward and do not be afraid. You are of those who are safe."
"Place your hand into your pocket. It will come out white without any blemish, and fold your hand close to your side against fear. These are two proofs from your Lord, to Pharaoh and his leaders. They have been a wicked people."
He said, "My Lord, I have killed a person from them, so I fear that they will kill me."
"My brother Aaron is more eloquent in speech than I. So send him with me to help and to confirm me. For I fear that they will deny me."
He said, "We will strengthen you with your brother, and We will provide you both with authority. Thus, they will not be able to touch either one of you. With Our signs, the two of you, along with those who follow you, will be the victors."
So when Moses went to them with Our clear signs, they said, "This is nothing but fabricated magic; nor did we hear of this from our fathers of old!"
Moses said, "My Lord is fully aware of who has brought the guidance from Him, and who will have the best deal in the Hereafter. The wicked never succeed."
Pharaoh said, "O commanders, I have not known of any god for you other than me. Therefore, O Haman, fire up the bricks and build me a platform, so perhaps I may take a look at the god of Moses! I am certain he is a liar."
He and his soldiers were arrogant in the land without any right, and they thought that they would not be returned to Us.
So We took him and his soldiers, and We cast them into the sea. So see what the end of the wicked was!
We made them role models for inviting to the fire. On the day of Resurrection, they will not be supported.
We made them followed by a curse in this world, and on the day of Resurrection they will be despised.
We had given Moses the book after We had destroyed the earlier generations, as an example for people and a guidance and mercy, perhaps they will take heed.
You were not on the western slope when We decreed the command to Moses. You were not a witness.
We established many generations, and many ages passed them by. You were not living among the people of Midyan, reciting Our signs to them. But We did send messengers.
Nor were you on the side of the mount when We called. But it is a mercy from your Lord, so that you may warn a people who received no warner before you, perhaps they may take heed.
Thus, if any disaster strikes them as a consequence of their own deeds they cannot say, "Our Lord, if only You sent a messenger to us, so that we would follow Your signs, and we would be of those who acknowledge."
But when the truth came to them from Us, they said, "If only he was given the same that was given to Moses!" Had they not rejected what was given to Moses before? They had said, "Two magicians assisting one another." They said, "We reject all these things."
Say, "Then bring forth a book from God that is better in guidance so I may follow it, if you are truthful."
But if they fail to respond to you, then know that they follow only their desires. Who is more astray than one who follows his desire, without guidance from God? God does not guide the wicked people.
We have delivered the message, perhaps they may take heed.
Those whom We gave the book to before this, they will acknowledge it.
If it is recited to them, they say, "We acknowledge it. It is the truth from our Lord. Indeed, we had peacefully surrendered before it."
To these We grant twice the reward for that they have been patient. They counter evil with good, and from Our provisions to them, they give.*
If they come across vain talk, they disregard it and say, "To us are our deeds, and to you is your deeds. Peace be upon you. We do not seek the ignorant."
You cannot guide whom you love. But it is God who guides whom He wills; and He is fully aware of those who receive the guidance.*
They said, "If we follow the guidance with you, we will be deposed from our land." Did We not establish for them a safe territory, to which all kinds of fruits are offered, as a provision from Us? Indeed, most of them do not know.
How many a town have We destroyed for turning boastful of their lifestyles. So here are their homes, nothing but uninhabited ruins after them, except a few. We were the inheritors.
Your Lord never annihilates the towns without sending a messenger to their capital, to recite Our signs to them. We never annihilate the towns unless their people are wicked.
Anything that is given to you is only the materials of this world, and its glitter. What is with God is far better, and everlasting. Do you not reason?
Is one whom We promised a good promise, and it will come to pass, equal to one whom We provided with the goods of this life, then on the day of Resurrection he is of those who will suffer?
On the day when He calls upon them, saying: "Where are My partners whom you used to claim?"
Those who have deserved the retribution will say, "Our Lord, these are the ones we misled; we misled them only because we ourselves were misled. We seek to absolve ourselves to You, it was not us that they served."
It will be said, "Call upon your partners," but they will not respond to them. They will see the retribution. If only they were guided!
On that day, He will ask them and say, "What was the answer you gave to the messengers?"
They will be shocked by the news on that day, they will be speechless.
As for the one who repents, acknowledges, and does good works; perhaps he will be with the winners.
Your Lord creates what He wills, and He selects; it is not for them to select. Glory be to God, He is far above the partners they set up.
Your Lord knows what is concealed in their chests and what they declare.
He is God, there is no god but He. To Him belongs all praise in the first and in the last, and judgment belongs with Him, and to Him you will be returned.
Say, "Have you noted: what if God made the night eternal, until the day of Resurrection? Which god, other than God, can bring you with light? Do you not listen?"
Say, "Have you noted: what if God made the daylight eternal, until the day of Resurrection? Which god, other than God, can provide you with a night for your rest? Do you not see?"
From His mercy is that He created for you the night and the day, in order to rest in it, and that you may seek of His provisions. Perhaps you may be appreciative.
The day He will call them and say, "Where are My partners whom you had claimed?"*
We will extract from every nation a witness, then We will say, "Bring forth your proof." They will then realize that all truth belongs with God, and what they had invented will abandon them.
Qarun was from among Moses' people, but he betrayed them. We gave him such treasures that the keys thereof were almost too heavy for the strongest person. His people said to him: "Do not enjoy, for God does not like hedonists."*
"Seek with the provisions bestowed upon you by God the abode of the Hereafter, and do not forget your share in this world, and do good as God has done good to you. Do not seek corruption in the land. God does not like the corruptors."
He said, "I have attained all this only because of my own knowledge." Did he not realize that God had annihilated before him generations that were much stronger than he, and greater in riches? The transgressors were not asked about their crimes.
Then he came out among his people draped in his ornaments. Those who preferred this worldly life said, "Oh, if only we were given similar to what Qarun has been given. Indeed, he is very fortunate."
Those who were blessed with knowledge said, "Woe to you! The reward from God is far better for those who acknowledge and do good works. None attains it except the steadfast."
We then caused the earth to swallow him and his mansion. He had no group that could protect him against God; nor would he be victorious.
Those who wished they were in his place the day before said, "Indeed it is God Who provides or restricts for whomever He chooses from among His servants. Had it not been for God's grace towards us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us as well. We now realize that the ingrates never succeed."
Such will be the abode of the Hereafter; We reserve it for those who do not seek prestige on earth, nor corruption. The end belongs to the righteous.
Whoever brings forth a good deed, he will receive a better reward. Whoever brings forth a sin then the retribution for their sins will be to the extent of their deeds.
Surely, the One who decreed the Quran to you will summon you to a predetermined appointment. Say, "My Lord is fully aware of who it is that brings the guidance, and who has gone astray."
Nor did you expect this book to come your way; but this is a mercy from your Lord. Therefore, you shall not side with the ingrates.
Nor shall you be diverted from God's signs, after they have come to you. Invite to your Lord, and do not be of those who set up partners.
Do not call besides God any god, there is no god but He. Everything will fade away except His presence. To Him is the judgment, and to Him you will be returned.
A1L30M40*
Did the people think that they will be left to say, "We acknowledge" without being put to the test?
While We had tested those before them, so that God would know those who are truthful and so that He would know the liars.
Or did those who sinned think that they would be ahead of Us? Miserable indeed is their judgment!
Whosoever looks forward to meeting God, then God's meeting will come. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
Whosoever strives then he is only striving for himself; for God is in no need of the worlds.
Those who acknowledged and did good works, We will cancel their sins and We will reward them in the best for what they did.
We instructed the human to be good to his parents. But if they strive to make you set up partners with Me, then do not obey them. To Me are all your destinies, and I will inform you of what you used to do.
Those who acknowledged and did good works, We will admit them with the righteous.
Among the people are those who say, "We acknowledge God," but if he is harmed in the sake of God, he equates the persecution inflicted by the people with God's punishment! If a victory comes from your Lord, he says: "We were with you!" Is God not fully aware of what is inside the chests of the worlds?
God is fully aware of those who acknowledged, and He is fully aware of the hypocrites.
Those who rejected said to those who acknowledged: "Follow our path and we will carry your sins." But they cannot carry anything from their sins, they are liars!
They will carry their own burdens as well as burdens with their burdens, and they will be asked on the day of Resurrection regarding what they fabricated.*
We had sent Noah to his people, so he stayed with them one thousand years less fifty calendar years. Then the flood took them while they were wicked.*
So We saved him and the people on the Ship, and We made it a sign for the worlds.*
And Abraham when he said to his people: "Serve God and be aware of Him; that is better for you if you knew."
"You are serving nothing but idols besides Him, and you are creating fabrications. Those that you serve besides God do not possess for you any provisions, so seek with God the provision and serve Him and be thankful to Him; to Him you will return."
"If you reject, then nations before you have also rejected." The messenger is only required to deliver clearly.
Did they not observe how God initiates the creation then He returns it? All that for God is easy to do.*
Say, "Roam the earth and observe how the creation was initiated. Then God will establish the final design. God is capable of all things."*
"God will punish whom He wills and He will have mercy on whom He wills, and to Him you will return."
"You will not be able to challenge this fact, on earth or in the heavens, nor do you have besides God any ally or victor."
Those who rejected God's signs and in meeting Him, they have forsaken My mercy, and they will have a painful retribution.
But the only response from his people was their saying: "Kill him, or burn him." But God saved him from the fire. In this are signs for a people who acknowledge.
He said, "You have taken idols besides God in order to preserve some friendship among you in this worldly life. But then, on the day of Resurrection, you will disown one another, and curse one another. Your destiny is hell, and you will have no victors."*
Thus, Lot acknowledged with him and said, "I am emigrating to my Lord. He is the Noble, the Wise."
We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and We made within his progeny the prophethood and the book. We gave him his reward in this world, and in the Hereafter he is among the righteous.
And Lot, when he said to his people: "You commit a lewdness that no others in the world have done before!"
"You sexually approach men, you commit highway robbery, and you bring all vice to your society." But the only response from his people was to say, "Bring us God's retribution, if you are being truthful!"
He said, "My Lord, grant me victory over the wicked people."
When Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they then said, "We are to destroy the people of such a town, for its people have been wicked."
He said, "But Lot is in it!" They said, "We are fully aware of who is in it. We will save him and his family, except his wife; she is of those doomed."
Thus when Our messengers came to Lot, they were mistreated, and he was embarrassed towards them. They said, "Do not fear, and do not be saddened. We will save you and your family, except for your wife; she is of those doomed."
"We will send down upon the people of this town an affliction from the sky, as a consequence of their wickedness."
We left remains of it as a clear sign for a people who understand.
To Midian was their brother Shuayb. He said, "O my people, serve God and seek the Last day, and do not roam the earth corrupting."
But they denied him, thus the earthquake took them; they were then left dead in their homes.
And Aad and Thamud. Much was made apparent to you from their dwellings. The devil had adorned their works in their eyes, thus he diverted them from the path, even though they could see.
And Qarun, and Pharaoh, and Haman; Moses went to them with clear proofs. But they became arrogant in the land, and they were not the first.*
We took each by his sins. Some of them We sent upon violent winds, some of them were taken by the scream, some of them We caused the earth to swallow, and some of them We drowned. God is not the One who wronged them; it is they who wronged themselves.
The example of those who take allies besides God is like the spider, how it makes a home; and the less reliable home is the home of the spider, if they only knew.*
God knows that what they are calling on besides Him is nothing. He is the Noble, the Wise.
Such are the examples We cite for the people, but none reason except the knowledgeable.
God created the heavens and the earth, with truth. In that is a sign for the faithful.
Recite what is inspired to you of the book, and hold the contact prayer; for the contact prayer prohibits evil and vice, and the remembrance of God is the greatest. God knows everything you do.*
Do not argue with the people of the book except in the best manner; except for those who are wicked amongst them; and say, "We acknowledge what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you, and our god and your god is the same; to Him we peacefully surrender."
Similarly, We have sent down to you the Book. Thus, those whom We have given the book will acknowledge it. Also, some of your people will acknowledge it. The only ones who mock Our signs are the ingrates.
You were not reciting any book before this, nor were you writing one down by your hand. In that case, the doubters would have had reason.
In fact, it is a clear revelation in the chests of those who have been given knowledge. It is only the wicked who doubt Our signs.
They said, "If only signs would come down to him from his Lord!" Say, "All signs are with God, and I am but a clear warner."*
Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the book, being recited to them? In that is a mercy and a reminder for people who acknowledge.
Say, "God is enough as a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. As for those who acknowledge falsehood and reject God, they are the losers."
They hasten you for the retribution! If it were not for a predetermined appointment, the retribution would have come to them. It will come to them suddenly, when they do not expect.
They hasten you for the retribution; while hell surrounds the ingrates.
The day will come when the retribution overwhelms them, from above them and from beneath their feet; and We will say, "Taste the results of what you used to do!"
"O My servants who acknowledged, My earth is spacious, so serve only Me."
Every person will taste death, then to Us you will be returned.
Those who acknowledge and do good work, We will settle them in mansions in Paradise, with rivers flowing beneath. Eternally they abide therein. Excellent is the reward for the workers.
They are the ones who were patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
Many a creature does not carry its provision; God provides for it, as well as for you. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.*
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth, and put the sun and the moon in motion?" They will say, "God." Why then did they deviate?
God expands the provision for whomever He chooses from among His servants, and withholds it. God is fully aware of all things.
If you ask them: "Who sends down water from the sky, thus reviving the land after its death?" They will say, "God," Say, "Praise be to God." But most of them do not understand.
This worldly life is no more than fun and distraction, while the abode of the Hereafter is the reality, if they only knew.
When they ride on a ship, they call on God, devoting the system to Him. But as soon as He saves them to the shore, they set up partners.
Let them reject what We have given them, and let them enjoy; for they will come to know.
Have they not seen that We have established a safe territory, while all around them the people are in constant danger? Would they still acknowledge falsehood, and reject God's blessings?
Who is more evil than one who fabricates lies and attributes them to God, or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a place in hell for the ingrates?
As for those who strive in Our cause, We will guide them to Our paths. For God is with the pious.
A1L30M40*
The Romans have won,*
At the lowest point on the earth. But after their victory, they will be defeated.
In a few more years. The decision before and after is for God, and on that day those who acknowledge will rejoice.
With God's victory. He gives victory to whom He wishes; He is the Noble, the Compassionate.
Such is God's pledge, and God does not break His pledge, but most people do not know.
They only know the outside appearance of the worldly life; and regarding the Hereafter, they are ignorant.
Did they not reflect upon themselves? God did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them except by truth and an appointed term. But most of the people are in denial regarding their meeting with their Lord.
Did they not roam the earth and see how it ended for those before them? They were more powerful than them, and they cultivated the land and they built in it far more than these have built, and their messengers came to them with the proofs. God was not to wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
Then the end of those who did evil was evil, that is because they denied God's signs, and they used to mock them.
God initiates the creation, then He repeats it, then to Him you will return.
The day when the moment will be established, the criminals will be in despair.
They did not have any intercessors from the partners they set up, and they will reject such partners.
On the day the moment is established, they will be separated.
Then as for those who acknowledged and did good works, they will be delighted in a luxurious place.
As for those who rejected and denied Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, they shall be brought forth for the retribution.
So, glory be to God when you retire and when you wake.
To Him is all praise in the heavens and in the earth, and in the evening and when you go out.
He brings the living out of the dead, and He brings the dead out of the living. He revives the land after its death. Similarly you will be brought out.
From His signs is that He created you from dust, then you become human beings spreading out.
From His signs is that He created for you mates from yourselves that you may reside with them, and He placed between you affection and compassion. In that are signs for a people who reflect.*
From His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of your languages and your colors. In that are signs for the world.*
From His signs is your sleep by night and day, and your seeking of His bounty. In that are signs for a people who listen.
From His signs is that He shows you the lightning, by way of fear and hope, and He sends down water from the sky, and He revives the land with it after its death. In that are signs for a people who understand.
From His signs is that the heavens and the earth will rise by His command. Then, when He calls you forth from the earth, you will come out.
To Him is all that is in the heavens and the earth. All are subservient to Him.
He is the One who initiates the creation, then He repeats it; this is easy for Him. To Him is the highest example in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise.*
An example is cited for you from among yourselves: are there any from among those who are still dependant that are partners to you in what provisions We have given you that you become equal therein? Would you fear them as you fear each other? It is such that We clarify the signs for a people who have sense.
No, those who were wrong followed their desires without knowledge. So who can guide one whom God misguides? They will have no victors.
So establish yourself to the system of monotheism. It is the nature that God has made the people on. There is no changing in God's creation. Such is the pure system, but most people do not know.*
Turn to Him, be aware of Him, hold the contact prayer, and do not be of those who set up partners.
Or like those who split up their system, and they became sects; each group happy with what it had.*
If harm afflicts the people, they call out sincerely to their Lord. But then, when He gives them a taste of His mercy, a group of them set up partners with their Lord!
So as to reject what We gave them. Enjoy then, for you will come to know.
Or have We sent down to them a proof, which speaks to them of what they have set up?
If We grant the people a taste of mercy, they become happy with it, but if evil afflicts them for what they have done, they become in despair!*
Did they not see that God grants the provisions for whom He wills, and He is able? In that are signs for a people who acknowledge.
So give the relative his due, and the poor, and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek God's presence, and they are the successful ones.
Any financial interest you have placed to grow in the people's money, it will not grow with God. But, any contribution that you have placed seeking His presence; those will be multiplied.
God who created you, then He provided for you, then He puts you to death, then He brings you to life. Is there any among the partners you set up that can do any of this? Be He glorified and exalted above what they set up.
Pollution has appeared in the land and the sea by the hands of people for what they earned. He will make them taste some of what they have done, perhaps they will revert.
Say, "Roam the earth and see how the end was for those before. Most of them had set up partners."
So establish yourself to the system which is straight, before a day comes from God that none can avert. On that day they shall be separated.
Whosoever rejects, then he will suffer his rejection; and whosoever does good works, then it is for themselves that they are preparing a good place.
So that He will reward those who acknowledge and do good works from His grace. He does not love the ingrates.
Among His signs is that He sends the winds with glad tidings, and to give you a taste of His mercy, and so that the ships may sail by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty; perhaps you will be thankful.
We have sent before you messengers to their people, so they came to them with clear proofs, then We took revenge on those who were criminals, and it is an obligation for Us to grant victory to those who acknowledge.
God is the one who sends the winds, so they raise clouds, and He spreads them in the sky as He wishes, then He turns them into joined pieces, then you see the rain drops come forth from their midst. Then when He makes them fall on whomever He wills of His servants, they rejoice!
Even though just before He sent it down to them, they were in despair!
So look at the effects of God's compassion, how He revives the land after its death. Such is the One who will revive the dead, and He is capable of all things.
If We chose to send a wind and they see it turn yellow, then they will continue to be ingrates after it.
You cannot make the dead listen, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs.*
Nor can you enlighten the blind from their straying; but you can only make those who acknowledge Our signs listen, for they have peacefully surrendered.
God is the One Who created you from weakness, then He made strength after the weakness, then He makes after the strength a weakness and gray hair. He creates what He wills and He is the Knowledgeable, the Able.
The day the moment is established, the criminals will swear that they have remained only for a moment! Thus they were deluded.
Those who were given knowledge and faith said, "You have remained according to God's decree until the day of Resurrection; so this is the day of Resurrection, but you did not know."
So on that day, the excuses of those who transgressed will not help them, nor will they be allowed to revert.
We have cited for the people in this Quran of every example. If you come to them with a sign, those who rejected will say, "You are bringing falsehood!"
It is thus that God seals the hearts of those who do not know.
So be patient, for God's promise is true, and do not be dissuaded by those who do not have certainty.
A1L30M40*
These are the signs of the book of wisdom.
A guide and a mercy for the good doers.
Those who hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment and regarding the Hereafter they are certain.
These are on guidance from their Lord, and they are the successful ones.
Among the people, there are those who accept baseless hadiths to mislead from the path of God without knowledge, and they take it as entertainment. These will have a humiliating retribution.
When Our signs are recited to him, he turns away arrogantly as if he did not hear them, as if there is deafness in his ears. So announce to him a painful retribution.
Those who acknowledge and do good works, for them will be gardens of bliss.
Abiding eternally therein with certainty, as promised by God. He is the Noble, the Wise.
He created the skies without pillars that you can see. He placed in the earth firm stabilizers so that it would not tumble with you, and He spread on it all kinds of creatures. We sent down water from the sky, thus We caused to grow all kinds of good plants.
This is God's creation, so show me what those besides Him have created? Indeed, the transgressors are far astray.
We had given Luqman the wisdom: "You shall be thankful to God, and whoever is thankful is being thankful for his own good. As for whosoever rejects, then God is Rich, Praiseworthy."
And Luqman said to his son, while he was advising him: "O my son, do not set up any partners with God; for setting up partners is an immense wrongdoing."
We enjoined the human being regarding his parents. His mother bore him with hardship upon hardship, and his weaning takes two calendar years. You shall give thanks to Me, and to your parents. To Me is the final destiny.*
If they strive to make you set up any partners besides Me, then do not obey them. But continue to treat them amicably in this world. You shall follow only the path of those who have sought Me. Ultimately, you all return to Me, then I will inform you of everything you have done.
"O my son, God will bring out anything, be it as small as a mustard seed, be it deep inside a rock, or be it in the heavens or the earth, God will bring it. God is Sublime, Ever-aware."
"O my son, hold the contact prayer and advocate righteousness and forbid evil, and bear with patience whatever befalls you. These are the most honorable traits."
"Do not turn your cheek arrogantly from people, nor shall you roam the earth insolently. For God does not like the arrogant show offs."
"Be humble in how you walk and lower your voice. For the harshest of all voices is the donkey's voice."
Did you not see that God has committed in your service everything in the heavens and the earth, and He has showered you with His blessings, both apparent and hidden? Yet from the people are some who argue about God without knowledge, without guidance, and without an enlightening book.
If they are told: "Follow what God has sent down." They say, "No, we will follow what we found our fathers doing." What if the devil had been leading them to the agony of hell?
Whosoever peacefully surrenders himself completely to God, while he is righteous, then he has taken hold of the strongest bond. To God all matters will return.
Whosoever rejects, then do not be saddened by his rejection. To Us is their ultimate return, then We will inform them of what they had done. God is fully aware of what is inside the chests.
We let them enjoy for a while, then We commit them to severe retribution.
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They will say, "God." Say, "Praise be to God." Yet, most of them do not know.
To God belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
If all the trees on earth were made into pens, and the ocean were supplied by seven more oceans, the words of God would not run out. God is Noble, Wise.
Your creation and your resurrection is all as one breath. God is Hearer, Seer.
Have you not seen that God merges the night into the day and merges the day into the night, and that He has committed the sun and the moon, each running to a predetermined term; and that God is Ever-aware of everything you do?
That is because God is the truth, what they call on besides Him is falsehood, and that God is the High, the Great.
Have you not seen the ships sailing the sea, carrying God's provisions, to show you some of His signs? In that are signs for every one who is patient, thankful.
When waves surround them like mountains, they call on God, sincerely devoting the system to Him. But when He saves them to the shore, some of them revert. None discard Our signs except those who are betrayers, ingrates.
O people, you shall reverence your Lord, and fear a day when a father cannot help his own child, nor can a child help his father. Certainly, God's promise is truth. Therefore, do not be deceived by this worldly life; and do not be deceived from God by arrogance.
With God is the knowledge regarding the moment. He sends down the rain, and He knows what is inside the wombs. No person knows what it may gain tomorrow, nor does any person know in which land it will die. God is Knowledgeable, Ever-aware.*
A1L30M40*
The sending down of this book, without a doubt, from the Lord of the worlds.
Or do they say, "He fabricated it!" No, it is the truth from your Lord, so that you may warn a people who never received a warner before you, in order that they may be guided.
God is the One who created the heavens and the earth, and everything between them in six days, then He settled to the Throne. You do not have beside Him any Lord, nor intercessor. Will you not then remember?*
He arranges matters from the heaven to the earth, and then it ascends to Him in a day which is equivalent to one thousand of the years which you count.
Such is the Knower of the unseen and the seen; the Noble, the Compassionate.
The One who perfected everything He created and He began the creation of the human from clay.
Then He made his offspring from a structure derived from an insignificant liquid.
Then He evolved him, and blew into him from His Spirit. He made for you the hearing, the eyesight, and the hearts; rarely are you thankful.
They said, "When we are buried in the ground, will we be created anew?" Indeed, they reject the meeting of their Lord.
Say, "The angel of death that has been assigned to you will take you, then to your Lord you will be returned."
If only you could see the criminals when they bow down their heads before their Lord: "Our Lord, we have now seen and we have heard, so send us back and we will do good work. Now we have attained certainty!"*
If We had wished, We could have given every person its guidance, but the word from Me has taken effect, that I will fill hell with Jinn and humans all together.
So taste the consequences of your ignoring/forgetting this day; for We have now ignored/forgotten you. Taste the eternal retribution in return for what you used to do.*
The only people who acknowledge Our signs are those whom when they are reminded by them, they fall prostrating, and they glorify the praise of their Lord, and they are not arrogant.
Their sides readily forsake their beds, to call on their Lord out of fear and hope, and from Our provisions to them they give.
No person knows what is being hidden for them of joy, as a reward for what they used to do.
Is one who was an acknowledger the same as one who was wicked? They are not the same.
As for those who acknowledge and do good works, for them are eternal Paradises as an abode, in return for their works.
As for those who were wicked, their abode is the fire. Every time they try to leave it, they will be put back in it, and it will be said to them: "Taste the retribution of the fire in which you used to deny."
We will let them taste the worldly retribution before the greater retribution, perhaps they will revert.
Who is more wicked than one who is reminded of his Lord's signs, then he turns away from them? We will exact a punishment from the criminals.
We have given Moses the book. So do not be in any doubt about his encounter. We made it a guide for the Children of Israel.
We made from among them leaders who guided in accordance with Our command, for they were patient and had certainty regarding Our signs.
Your Lord will separate between them on the day of resurrection regarding what they disputed in.
Is it not a guide for them how many generations We have annihilated before them in whose homes they now walk? In that are signs. Do they not listen?
Have they not seen that We drive the water to the barren lands, and produce with it crops to feed their livestock, as well as themselves? Do they not see?
They say, "When is this victory, if you are being truthful?"
Say, "On the day of the victory, it will not benefit those who rejected if they acknowledge, nor will they be given respite."
Therefore, turn away from them and wait, for they too are waiting.
O you prophet, you shall be aware of God, and do not obey the ingrates and the hypocrites. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
Follow what is being revealed to you by your Lord. God is fully aware of all that you do.
Put your trust in God. God suffices as an advocate.
God did not make any man with two hearts in his body. Nor did He make your wives whom you estrange to be as your mothers. Nor did He make your adopted children to be your sons. Such is what you claim with your mouths, but God speaks the truth, and He guides to the path.*
Call them by their father's name. That is more just with God. But if you do not know their fathers, then, as your brothers in the system and members of your family. There is no sin upon you if you make a mistake in this respect; but you will be responsible for what your hearts deliberately intend. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
The prophet is closer to those who acknowledge than themselves, and his wives are mothers to them. God's decree to those who acknowledge and the emigrants is that before they help their relatives, they have taken care of their own families first. Such has been decreed in the book.
When We took from the prophets their covenant. From you, and from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary; We took from them a strong covenant.*
So that the truthful may be asked about their truthfulness, and He has prepared for the ingrates a painful retribution.
O you who acknowledge, remember God's favor upon you when soldiers attacked you and We sent upon them a wind and invisible soldiers. God is Seer of everything you do.
For they came from above you, and from beneath you; and your eyes were terrified, and the hearts reached to the throat, and you harbored doubts about God.
That is when those who acknowledge were truly tested; they were severely shaken up.
The hypocrites and those who have a sickness in their hearts said, "God and His messenger promised us nothing but illusions!"*
A group of them said, "O people of Yathrib, you cannot make a stand; therefore, retreat." A small party of them sought permission from the prophet, saying: "Our homes are exposed," while they were not exposed. They just wanted to flee.*
If the enemy had entered at them from all sides, and then they were asked to betray, they would do so with very little hesitation.
Indeed they had pledged to God before this that they would not turn around and flee. Making a pledge to God brings great responsibility.
Say, "It will not benefit you to flee away from death or from being killed, for you will only have the enjoyment for a short while."
Say, "Who can protect you from God if He intends to harm you, or He intends any blessing for you?" They will never find besides God any ally or victor.
God already knows which of you are the hinderers, and those who say to their brothers: "Come and stay with us." Rarely do they mobilize for battle.
They are miserable towards you. Then, when fear comes, you see their eyes rolling, as if death had already come to them. But once the fear is gone, they lash out at you with sharp tongues. They are miserable towards doing any good. These have not acknowledged, so God nullifies their works. This is easy for God to do.
They thought that the opponents had not yet mobilized. If the opponents do appear, they wish that they were out in the desert, seeking out news for you. Even if they were among you, they would not have fought except very little.
Indeed, in the messenger of God a good example has been set for he who seeks God and the Last day and thinks constantly about God.*
When those who acknowledge saw the opponents, they said, "This is what God and His messenger have promised us, and God and His messenger are truthful." This only increased their faith and their peacefully surrender.*
From among those who acknowledge are men who fulfilled their pledge to God. Thus, some of them died, while some are still waiting; but they never altered in the least.
That God may recompense the truthful for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites if He so wills, or accepts their repentance. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
God drove back those who rejected with their rage, they left empty handed. God thus spared those who acknowledge any fighting. God is Powerful, Noble.
He also brought down those who helped support them among the people of the book from their secure positions, and He threw fear into their hearts. Some of them you killed, and some you took captive.
He inherited you their land, their homes, their money, and lands you had never stepped on. God is able to do all things.
O prophet, say to your wives: "If you are seeking this worldly life and its vanities, then come, I will make a provision for you and release you in an amicable manner."
"But if you are seeking God and His messenger, and the abode of the Hereafter, then God has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward."
O wives of the prophet, if any of you commits evident lewdness, then the retribution will be doubled for her. This is easy for God to do.
Any whosoever of you is obedient to God and His messenger, and does good works, We will grant her double the recompense, and We have prepared for her a generous provision.
O wives of the prophet, you are not like any other women. If you are righteous, then do not speak too softly, lest those with disease in their hearts will move with desire; you shall speak in an honorable manner.*
You shall settle down in your homes, and do not be about like the olden days of ignorance. You shall hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards betterment, and obey God and His messenger. God wishes to remove any affliction from you, O people of the sanctuary, and to purify you completely.*
Mention all that is being recited in your homes of God's signs and the wisdom. God is Sublime, Ever-aware.
Surely, the peacefully surrendering men, and the peacefully surrendering women, the acknowledging men, and the acknowledging women, the obedient men, and the obedient women, the truthful men, and the truthful women, the patient men, and the patient women, the humble men, and the humble women, the charitable men, and the charitable women, the fasting men, and the fasting women, the men who guard their private parts, and the women who similarly guard, and the men who commemorate God frequently, and the commemorating women; God has prepared for them a forgiveness and a great recompense.
It is not for an acknowledging man or acknowledging woman, if God and His messenger issue any command, that they have any choice in their decision. Anyone who disobeys God and His messenger, he has gone far astray.
You said to the one who was blessed by God, and blessed by you: "Keep your wife and reverence God," and you hid inside yourself what God wished to proclaim. You feared the people, while it was God you were supposed to fear. So when Zayd ended his relationship with his wife, We had you marry her, to establish that there is no wrongdoing for those who acknowledge marrying the wives of their adopted sons if their relationship is ended. God's command is always done.
There is no blame on the prophet in doing anything that God has decreed upon him. Such was God's sunna with the people of old. God's command is a determined duty.*
Those who deliver God's messages, and reverence Him, and they do not reverence anyone but God. God suffices as a Reckoner.
Muhammad was not the father of any man among you, but he was the messenger of God and the seal of the prophets. God is fully aware of all things.
O you who acknowledge, you shall remember God frequently.
Glorify Him morning and evening.
He is the One who supports you, along with His angels, to lead you out of darkness into the light. He is ever Compassionate towards those who acknowledge.
Their greeting the day they meet Him is: "Peace" and He has prepared for them a generous recompense.
O prophet, We have sent you as a witness, and a bearer of good news, and a warner.
Inviting to God, by His leave, and a guiding beacon.
Give good news to those who acknowledge, that they have deserved from God a great blessing.
Do not obey the ingrates and the hypocrites, and ignore their insults, put your trust in God; God suffices as an advocate.
O you who acknowledge, if you married the acknowledging women and then divorced them before having intercourse with them, then there is no interim required of them. You shall compensate them, and let them go in an amicable manner.
O prophet, We have made lawful for you the wives to whom you have already given their dowry, and the one who is committed to you by oath, as granted to you by God, and the daughters of your father's brothers, and the daughters of your father's sisters, and the daughters of your mother's brothers, and the daughters of your mother's sisters, of whom they have emigrated with you. Also, the acknowledging woman who had decreed herself to the prophet, the prophet may marry her if he wishes, as a privilege given only to you and not to those who acknowledge. We have already decreed their rights in regard to their spouses and those who are still dependants. This is to spare you any hardship. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
You may postpone whom you will of them, and you may receive whom you will. Whomsoever you seek of those whom you have set aside then there is no sin upon you. Such is best that they may be comforted and not grieve, and may all be pleased with what you give them. God knows what is in your hearts. God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate.
No women are lawful to you beyond this, nor that you change them for other wives, even though you may be attracted by their beauty, except those to whom you are committed by oaths. God is watchful over all things.*
O you who acknowledge, do not enter the prophet's homes except if you are invited to a meal, without you forcing such an invitation. But if you are invited, you may enter. When you finish eating, you shall leave, without staying to wait for a hadith. This used to annoy the prophet, and he was shy to tell you. But God does not shy away from the truth. If you ask his wives for something, ask them from behind a barrier. This is purer for your hearts and their hearts. It is not for you to harm God's messenger, nor you should marry his wives after him. This is a gross offence with God.*
If you reveal anything, or hide it, God is fully aware of all things.
There is no sin upon them before their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their offspring yet to come, or their women, or those who are still their dependants. Be aware of God, for God is witness over all things.
God and His angels support the prophet. O you who acknowledge, you shall support him, and yield completely.*
Surely those who harm God and His messenger, God will curse them in this life and in the Hereafter; and He has prepared for them a shameful retribution.
Those who harm the acknowledging men and the acknowledging women, with no just reason, they have brought upon themselves a slander and a gross sin.
O prophet, tell your wives, your daughters, and the wives of those who acknowledge that they should lengthen upon themselves their outer garments. That is better so that they would be recognized and not harmed. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
If the hypocrites, and those with disease in their hearts and those who spread lies in the city do not refrain, then We will let you overpower them, then they will not be able to remain as your neighbors except for a short while.
They are cursed wherever they are found, and they are taken and killed in numbers.
This is God's way with those who have passed away before, and you will not find any change in God's way.*
The people ask you regarding the moment. Say, "Its knowledge is with God. For all that you know the moment may be near!"*
God has cursed the ingrates, and He has prepared for them hell.
Eternally they abide therein. They will find no ally, or victor.
On the day when their faces will be turned over in the fire, they will say, "Oh, we wish we had obeyed God, and obeyed the messenger"
They will say, "Our Lord, we have obeyed our leaders and our learned ones, but they misled us from the path."
"Our Lord, give them double the retribution, and curse them with a mighty curse."
O you who acknowledge, do not be like those who harmed Moses, but then God cleared him of all they said, and he was honorable before God.
O you who acknowledge, be aware of God and speak only the truth.
He will then direct your works, and forgive your sins. Whosoever obeys God and His messenger has attained a great triumph.
We have offered the trust to the heavens and the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to bear it, and were fearful of it. But the human being accepted it; he was transgressing, ignorant.*
So that God may punish the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, and the men who set up partners and the women who set up partners. God redeems the acknowledging men and the acknowledging women. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.*
Praise be to God, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and the earth; and to Him is the praise in the Hereafter. He is the Wise, the Ever-aware.
He knows what goes into the earth, and what comes out of it, and what comes down from the sky, and what climbs into it. He is the Compassionate, Forgiver.
Those who rejected said, "the moment will not come upon us!" Say, "Yes, by my Lord, it will come to you." He is the Knower of the unseen, not even an atom's weight or less than that or greater can be hidden from Him, be it in the heavens or the earth. All are in a clear record.
That He may reward those who acknowledge and do good works. To them will be forgiveness and a generous provision.
As for those who sought against Our signs to frustrate them, they will have retribution of painful affliction.
Those that have been given knowledge will see that what has been sent down to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the Noble, the Praiseworthy.
Those who rejected said, "Shall we lead you to a man who will tell you that after you are dismembered you will be created anew?"
"Has he invented a lie against God, or is there madness in him?" Indeed, those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter will be in retribution and far straying.
Have they not seen all that is before them and behind them, in the heaven and the earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them, or cause pieces of the sky to fall on them. In this is a sign for every obedient servant.
We granted David blessings from Us: "O mountains, glorify with him, as well as the birds." We softened the iron for him.
That you may make Armour coats that fit perfectly, and work righteousness. For I am Seer of what you do.
For Solomon the wind was given, traveling one month coming and one month going, and We caused a spring of petroleum to flow for him. From among the Jinn are those that worked for him by his Lord's leave; and any one of them who turns from Our commands, We shall cause him to taste the retribution of the fire.*
They made for him what he desired of enclosures, and statues, and pools of deep reservoirs, and heavy pots. "O family of David, work to show thanks." Only a few of My servants are appreciative.*
Then, when We decreed death for him, nothing informed them of his death until a worm kept eating from his staff, so when he fell down, the Jinn realized that if they had known the unseen, they would not have remained in the humiliating retribution.
There was for Sheba a sign in their homeland, with two paradises, on the right and the left. "Eat from the provisions of your Lord, and be thankful to Him." A good land, and a forgiving Lord.
But they turned away, so We sent them a destructive flash flood, and We substituted their two gardens into two gardens of rotten fruits, thorny plants, and a skimpy harvest.
We thus requited them for what they rejected. We do not requite except the ingrate.
We placed between them and between the towns that We blessed, towns that were easy to see; and We measured the journey between them: "Travel in them by night and day in complete security."
But they said, "Our Lord, make the measure between our journeys longer," and they wronged themselves. So We made them a thing of the past, and We scattered them into small groups. In this are signs for every person who is patient, thankful.*
Satan has been successful in his suggestions to them, for they followed him, except for a group of those who acknowledge.
He did not have any authority over them except that We might know who acknowledged the Hereafter from those who are doubtful about it. Your Lord is Keeper over all things.
Say, "Call on those whom you have claimed besides God. They do not possess even a single atom's weight in the heavens, or the earth. They possess no partnership therein, nor is there for Him any assistant among them."
Nor will intercession be of any help with Him, except for whom He has already given leave. Until when the terror has subsided from their hearts, they ask: "What did your Lord say?" They will say, "The truth!" He is the Most High, the Great.*
Say, "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "God! Either we or you are guided, or are clearly astray."
Say, "You will not be asked about our crimes, nor will we be asked for what you do."
Say, "Our Lord will gather us together then He will judge between us with truth. He is the Judge, the Knowledgeable."
Say, "Show me those whom you have set up as partners with Him! No; He is but God, the Noble, and the Wise."
We have sent you to all people to be a bearer of good news, as well as a warner; but most people do not know.
They say, "When is this promise, if you are truthful?"
Say, "You have an appointed day, which you cannot delay by one moment, nor advance."
Those who rejected have said, "We will not acknowledge this Quran, nor in what is already with him." If you could but see these transgressors when they stand before their Lord, how they will accuse one another back and forth. Those who were weak will say to those who were mighty: "If it were not for you, we would have been those who acknowledge!"
Those who were mighty will say to those who were weak: "Did we turn you away from the guidance after it had come to you? No, it was you who were criminal."
Those who were weak will say to those who were mighty: "No, it was your scheming night and day, when you commanded us to reject God, and to set up equals to Him." They will be filled with regret, when they see the retribution. We will place shackles around the necks of those who rejected. Are they not being requited for what they used to do?
We do not send a warner to any town, except its privileged hedonists would say, "We reject what you have been sent with."
They said, "We have more wealth and more children, and we will not be punished."
Say, "My Lord gives provisions to whomever He wishes, or He restricts them, but most people do not know."
It is not your money or your children that will bring you closer to Us, but only those who acknowledge and do good work, they will receive double the reward for their works, and they will reside in the high dwellings in peace.
As for those who sought against Our signs, they will be brought to the retribution.
Say, "My Lord gives provisions to whom He wishes of His servants and He restricts. Anything you spend, He will replace it; and He is the Best of providers."
On the day when We gather them all, then We will say to the angels: "Was it you that these people used to serve?"
They will say, "Be You glorified. You are our Lord, not them. No, most of them were serving the Jinn; most were those who acknowledge them."*
So today, none of you can help or harm one another. We will say to the transgressors: "Taste the retribution of the fire that you used to deny."
When Our clear signs were recited to them, they said, "This is but a man who wants to turn you away from what your parents were serving." They also said, "This is nothing but a fabricated lie." Those who rejected say of the truth when it has come to them: "This is nothing but evident magic!"
We had not given to them any book to study, nor did We send to them before you any warner.
Those before them had also denied, while they did not reach one tenth of what We have given to this generation, so they denied My messengers, how severe was My retribution!
Say, "I advise you to do one thing: that you stand to God, in pairs or as individuals, then reflect. There is no madness in your friend, he is only a warner to you in the face of a severe retribution."
Say, "I have not asked you for any wage; you can keep it. My wage is from God, and He is witness over all things."
Say, "My Lord rebuts with the truth. He is the Knower of all secrets."
Say, "The truth has come; while falsehood can neither initiate anything, nor resurrect."
Say, "If I stray, then I stray to my own loss. If I am guided, then it is because of what my Lord inspired to me. He is Hearer, Near."
If you could but see, when they will be terrified with no escape, and they will be taken from a place that is near.
They will say, "We acknowledge it," but it will be far too late.
They had rejected it in the past; and they conjectured about the unseen from a place far off.
They will be separated from what they had desired, as was done for their counterparts before. They have been in grave doubt.
Praise be to God, Initiator of the heavens and the earth; maker of the angels as messengers with powers/dimensions in twos, and threes, and fours. He increases in the creation as He wishes. God is able to do all things.*
Whatever mercy God opens for the people, none can stop it. What He holds back none can send it other than He. He is the Noble, the Wise.
O people, remember God's blessing upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides for you from the sky and the earth? There is no god besides Him, so why do you deviate?
If they deny you, then also messengers before you have been denied. To God will all matters be returned.
O people, God's promise is the truth; therefore, do not be deceived by this worldly life, and do not let the deceiver deceive you by invoking God.
The devil is an enemy to you, so treat him as an enemy. He only invites his faction to be the dwellers of hell.
Those who reject will have a painful retribution, and those who acknowledge and do good works, they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
The one whose evil work is adorned and he sees it as being good. God thus misguides whom/whomever wills, and He guides whom/whomever wills. So do not let yourself grieve over them. God is fully aware of what they are doing.
God is the One who sends the winds so it stirs up a cloud, then We drive it to a town that is dead, and We revive with it the land after it had died. Such is the resurrection.
Whosoever is seeking dignity, then know that to God belongs all dignity. To Him ascend the good words, and they are exalted by the good deeds. As for those who scheme evil, they will have a painful retribution, and their scheming will fail.*
God created you from dust, then from a droplet, then He made you into pairs. No female becomes pregnant, nor gives birth, without His knowledge. Nor does anyone have his life extended, or his life is shortened, except in a record. This is easy for God.*
Nor are the two seas the same. One is fresh and palatable, good to drink, while the other is salty and bitter. From each of them you eat tender meat, and you extract jewelry to wear. You see the ships sailing through them, seeking His provisions; and perhaps you may be appreciative.
He merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night. He has committed the sun and the moon, each runs for a predetermined period. Such is God your Lord; to Him is the sovereignty. As for those whom you call on besides Him, they do not possess a seed's shell.
If you call on them, they cannot hear you. Even if they hear you, they cannot respond to you. On the day of resurrection, they will reject your idolatry. None can inform you like an Ever-aware.*
O people, you are the poor when it comes to God, while God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
If He wishes, He could do away with you and He would bring a new creation.
This is not difficult for God.
None can carry the load of another, and even if it calls on another to bear part of its load, no other can carry any part of it, even if they were related. You will only be able to warn those who fear their Lord while unseen, and they hold the contact prayer. Whoever contributes, is contributing to himself. To God is the final destiny.
The blind and the seer are not equal.
Nor are the darkness and the light.
Nor are the shade and the heat.
Nor equal are the living and the dead; God causes whomever He wills to hear. You cannot make those who are in the graves hear.*
You are but a warner.
We have sent you with the truth, a bearer of good news, and a warner. There is not a nation but a warner came to it.
If they deny you, then those before them have also denied. Their messengers went to them with proofs, and the Psalms, and the enlightening book.
But then I seized those who rejected; how terrible was My retribution!
Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky, thus We produce with it fruits of various colors? Of the mountains are peaks that are white, red, or raven black.*
Among the people, and the animals, and the livestock, are various colors. As such, only the knowledgeable among God's servants reverence Him. God is Noble, Forgiving.
Surely, those who recite God's book, and hold the contact prayer, and spend secretly and openly from what We have provided them, they are seeking a trade that can never lose.
He will give them their recompense, and He will increase them from His blessings. He is Forgiving, Appreciative.
What We inspired to you from the book, it is the truth, authenticating what is present. God is Ever-aware of His servants, Seer.
Then We inherited the book to those whom We selected from Our servants. Subsequently, some of them wronged themselves, and others upheld it partly, while others were eager to work righteousness in accordance with God's will; this is the greatest triumph.
They will enter the gardens of Eden, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments in it will be of silk.
They will say, "Praise be to God who took away our sorrow. Our Lord is Forgiving, Appreciative."
"The One who admitted us into the abode of eternal bliss, out of His grace. In it, no boredom touches us, nor does any fatigue."
As for those who have rejected, for them is the fire of hell, where they do not terminate and die, nor is its retribution ever reduced for them. It is such that We requite every ingrate.
They will scream in it: "Our Lord, let us out, and we will work righteousness instead of the works we used to do." Did We not give you a long life so that he who would remember would take heed, and a warner came to you? Therefore, taste, for the transgressors will have no supporter.
God knows unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is knowledgeable of what is even inside the chests.
He is the One who made you successors on the earth. Subsequently, whoever rejects, then to him is his rejection. The rejection of those who do not appreciate only increases their Lord's abhorrence towards them. The rejection of those who do not appreciate only increases their loss.
Say, "Do you see the partners whom you have called on besides God? Show me what they have created on earth. Or do they possess any partnership in the heavens? Or have We given them a book wherein they are taking knowledge from it? Indeed, what the transgressors promise one another is no more than arrogance."
God is the One who holds the heavens and the earth, lest they cease to exist. They would certainly cease to exist if anyone else were to hold them after Him. He is Forbearing, Forgiving.
They swore by God in their strongest oaths, that if a warner came to them, they would be the most guided of all nations, but when a warner came to them, it only increased their aversion!
Arrogance on earth, and evil scheming The evil schemes only backfire on those who scheme them. Were they expecting anything different from the sunna used on the people of the past? You will not find any change in God's sunna.*
Did they not roam the earth and note what the consequence was for those who were before them? They were even more powerful than them in strength. But nothing can deter God be it in the heavens, or in the earth. He is Omniscient, Omnipotent.
If God were to punish the people for what they have earned, He would not leave a single creature standing. But He delays them to a predetermined time. Then, when their time comes, then God is Seer of His servants.
Y10S60*
By the wise Quran.
You are one of the messengers.
Upon a straight path.
The revelation of the Honorable, the Compassionate.
To warn a people whose fathers were not warned, for they are unaware.
The retribution has been deserved by most of them, for they do not acknowledge.
We have placed shackles around their necks, up to their chins, so that they are forced in direction.
We have placed a barrier in front of them, and a barrier behind them, thus We shielded them so they cannot see.
Whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not acknowledge.*
You can only warn him who follows the reminder, and reverences the Gracious while unseen. Give him good news of forgiveness and a generous reward.
It is indeed Us who resurrect the dead, and We record what they have done and left behind. Everything We have counted in a clear ledger.
Cite for them the example of the people of the town, when the messengers came to it.
Where We sent two to them, but they rejected them, so We supported them with a third one, thus they said, "We are messengers to you."
They replied: "You are but human beings like us, and the Gracious did not send down anything, you are only telling lies."
They said, "Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you."
"We are only required to give a clear delivery."
They replied: "We have welcomed you better than you deserve. If you do not cease, we will stone/excommunicate you, and you will receive a painful retribution from us!"
They said, "Keep your welcome with you, for you have been reminded. Indeed, you are transgressing people."
A man came running from the farthest part of the city, saying: "O my people, follow the messengers."
"Follow those who do not ask you for any wage, and are guided."
"Why should I not serve the One who initiated me, and to Him is your ultimate return?"
"Shall I take gods besides Him? If the Gracious intends any harm for me, their intercession cannot help me in the least, nor can they save me."
"Then I would be clearly astray."
"I have acknowledged your Lord, so listen to me!"
It was said, "Enter Paradise." He said "Oh, how I wish my people only knew!"
"Of what my Lord has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones."
We did not send down upon his people after him soldiers from the sky; for there was no need to send them down.
For all it took was one scream, whereupon they were stilled.
Alas for the servants. For every time a messenger went to them, they would ridicule him.
Did they not see how many generations We destroyed before them; do they not go back to them?
How every one of them will be summoned before Us.
A sign for them is the dead land, We revive it and produce from it seeds from which they eat.
We made in it gardens of date palms, and grapes, and We cause springs to gush forth therein.
So that they may eat from its fruits, and what they manufacture with their own hands. Would they be thankful?
Praise be to the One who created all pairs from what the earth sprouts out and from themselves, and from what they do not know.
A sign for them is the night, We remove the daylight from it, whereupon they are in darkness.
The sun runs to a specific destination, such is the design of the Noble, the Knowledgeable.
The moon: We have measured it to appear in stages, until it returns to being like an old curved sheath.
The sun is not required to overtake the moon, nor will the night precede the day; each of them is swimming in its own orbit.*
A sign for them is that We carried their ancestors on the charged Ship.
We created for them of its similarity, to ride in.
If We wished, We could drown them, so that their screaming would not be heard, nor could they be saved.
Except through a mercy from Us, and as an enjoyment for awhile.
When they are told: "Be aware of your present and your past, that you may attain mercy."
No matter what sign comes to them from the signs of their Lord, they turn away from it.
When they are told: "Spend from what God has provisioned you." Those who reject say to those who acknowledge: "Shall we feed those whom God could feed, if He so willed? You are clearly misguided!"
They say, "When is this promise to come, if you are truthful?"
They will not realize it when one scream overwhelms them, while they dispute.
They will not even be able to leave a will, nor will they be able to return to their people.
The horn will be blown, whereupon they will rise from the graves rushing towards their Lord.
They will say, "Woe to us. Who has resurrected us from our resting place? This is what the Gracious had promised. The messengers were truthful!"
It only took one scream, whereupon they are summoned before Us.
On this day, no person will be wronged in the least. You will be recompensed precisely for whatever you did.
The dwellers of Paradise will be, on that day, joyfully busy.
They and their spouses, both will be shaded, reclining on high furnishings.
They will have fruits therein; they will have in it whatever they ask for.
"Peace," a word from a Compassionate Lord.
"As for you, O criminals, you are singled out."
"Did I not pledge to you, O Children of Adam, that you should not serve the devil for he is your most ardent enemy?"
"That you should serve Me? That is a straight path."*
"He has misled mountain loads of you. Did you not possess any understanding?"
"This is hell that you have been promised!"
"Burn in it today, as a consequence of your rejection."
Today, We shall seal their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to everything they had done.
If We wished, We can blind their eyes, and they would race towards the path, but how would they see?
If We wished, We can freeze them in their place; thus, they can neither move forward, nor go back.
For whomever We grant a long life, We weaken him in body. Do they not understand?
We did not teach him poetry, nor does he need it. This is a reminder and a clear Quran.
To warn those who are alive, and so that the retribution will be deserved by the ingrates.*
Did they not see that We created for them with Our own hands livestock which they own?
They were subdued by Us for them. So some they ride, and some they eat.
They have in them other benefits, as well as drinks. Would they not be appreciative?
They have taken besides God other gods, perhaps they will help them!
They cannot help them. They become to them as foot-soldiers.
So do not be saddened by what they say. We are fully aware of what they conceal and what they declare.
Has the human being not seen that We have created him from a seed, and yet he would become a clear enemy?
He cites an example for Us, while forgetting his own creation! He says: "Who can resurrect the bones while they are dust?"
Say, "The One who made them in the first place will resurrect them. He is fully aware of every creation."*
The One who produces for you a fire from the green tree, which you burn.
Is not the One who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them? Yes indeed; He is the Creator, the Knowledgeable.
His command, when He wants anything, is to say to it: "Be" and it is!*
Therefore, praise be to the One in whose Hand is the sovereignty of all things, and to Him you will be returned.
By the arrangers in ranks.
By the forces that repel.
By the memory which follows.
Your god is indeed One.
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what lies between them, and Lord of the easts.
We have adorned the lowest heaven with the decoration of planets.
To guard against every rebellious devil.
They cannot listen to the command up high; and they are bombarded from every side.
Outcasts; they will have an eternal retribution.
Any of them who snatches something away, he is pursued by a piercing flame.
So ask them: "Are they the more powerful creation, or the others We created?" We have created them out of sticky clay.
While you were awed, they simply mocked.
When they are reminded, they do not care.
When they see a sign, they make fun of it.
They said, "This is nothing but evident magic!"
"Can it be that after we die and become dust and bones, that we are resurrected?"
"What about our fathers of old?"
Say, "Yes, and then you will be humiliated."
All it takes is one sound, then they will be staring.
They said, "Woe to us, this is the day of Judgment!"
This is the day of decisiveness that you used to deny.
Gather the transgressors, their mates, and all they served,
Beside God, and guide them to the path of hell.
Let them stand and be questioned:
"Why do you not support one another?"
No, for today they have totally given up.
Some of them came to each other, questioning.
They said, "You used to entice us from the right side."*
They replied: "No, it was you who were not those who acknowledge."
"We never had any power over you, but you were a wicked people."
"So our Lord's decree is now upon us, that we will suffer."
"We misled you, because we were astray."
Then, on that day they will all share in the retribution.
This is how We deal with the criminals.
When it was said to them: "There is no god except God," they would be arrogant.
They would say, "Shall we leave our gods because of a crazy poet?"
No, he has come with the truth and he has confirmed the messengers.
You will taste the greatest of retribution.
You are only recompensed for what you have done.
Except for God's servants who are faithful.
For them will be known provisions.
Fruits, and they will be honored.
In the gardens of bliss.
On furnishings which are opposite one another.
They will be served with cups of pure drinks.
Clear and tasty for the drinkers.
There is no bitterness therein, nor will they tire from it.
With them are attendants with wide eyes and a splendid look.
They are like fragile eggs.
So then they approached one another, questioning.
One of them said, "I used to have a friend."
"Who used to say, "Are you among those who acknowledge this?"
"That if we die and turn into dust and bones, that we would be called to account?""
He said, "Can anyone find him?"
So when he looked, he saw him in the midst of hell.
He said, "By God, you nearly ruined me!"
"Had it not been for my Lord's blessing, I would have been with you."
"Are we then not going to die,"
"Except for our first death, and we will not be punished?"
Such is the greatest triumph.
For this let those who will work endeavor.
Is that a better destination, or the tree of bitterness?
We have made it a punishment for the transgressors.
It is a tree that grows in the midst of hell.*
Its shoots are like the devils' heads.
They will eat from it, so that their bellies are filled up.
Then they will have with it a drink of boiling liquid.
Then they will be returned to hell.
They had found their parents astray.
So they too have hastened in their footsteps.
Most of the previous generations have strayed before them.
We had sent to them warners.
Thus note the consequences for those who were warned.
Except for God's servants who are faithful.
Noah had called upon Us, for We are the best to respond.
We saved him and his family from the great disaster.
We made his progeny the one that remained.
We kept his history for those who came later.
Peace be upon Noah among the worlds.
It is such that We reward the righteous.
He is of Our acknowledging servants.
Then We drowned the others.
From among his descendants was Abraham.
For he came to his Lord with a pure heart.
When he said to his father and his people: "What are you serving?"
"Is it fabricated gods, instead of God, that you want?"
"What do you say of the Lord of the worlds?"
Then he looked towards the stars.*
He said, "I am ill!"
So they turned away from him and departed.
He then went to their idols and said, "Can you not eat?"
"What is the matter, you do not speak?"
So he then turned on them, striking with his hand.
Then they approached him outraged.
He said, "Do you serve what you carve?"
"While God has created you, and all that you make!"
They said, "Build for him a structure, and then throw him into its fire."
So they wanted to harm him, but We made them the losers.
He said, "I am going to my Lord; He will guide me."
"My Lord, grant me from among the righteous."
So We gave him good news of a compassionate child.
When he grew enough to work with him, he said, "My son, I am seeing in a dream that I am sacrificing you. What do you think?" He said, "O my father, do what you are commanded to do. You will find me, God willing, patient."
So when they both had peacefully surrendered, and he put his forehead down.
We called him: "O Abraham,"
"You have acknowledged the vision." It was such that We rewarded the righteous.*
Surely, this was an exacting test.
We ransomed him with a great animal sacrifice.
We kept his history for those who came later.
Peace be upon Abraham.
It is thus that We reward the righteous.
He was of Our acknowledging servants.
We gave him the good news of the coming of Isaac, a prophet from among the righteous.
We blessed him and Isaac. From among their progeny, some are righteous, and some are clearly wicked.
Indeed, We have given Our grace to Moses and Aaron.
We saved them and their people from the great disaster.
We supported them, so that they became the winners.
We gave both the clear book.
We guided them to the straight path.
We kept their history for those who came later.
Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.
We thus reward the righteous.
Both of them were among Our acknowledging servants.
And Elias was one of the messengers.
When he said to his people: "Would you not be righteous?"
"Would you call on Baal and forsake the best Creator?"
"God is your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers of old!"
But they denied him. Thus they were called to account.
Except for God's devoted servants.
We kept his history for those who came later.
Peace be upon the family of Elias.
We thus reward the righteous.
He was one of our acknowledging servants.
And Lot was one of the messengers.
When We saved him and all his family.
Except an old woman who remained.
Then, We destroyed the rest.
You pass by their ruins in the morning;
In the night. Do you not understand?
And Jonah was one of the messengers.
When he escaped to the charged ship.
He was guilty, so he became among the losers.
Thus a whale swallowed him, and he was the one to blame.
Had it not been that he was one of those who implored,
He would have stayed in its belly until the day of resurrection.
So We threw him on the shore while he was sick.
We caused seaweed to grow on him.
We sent him to a hundred thousand, or more.
They acknowledged, so We gave them enjoyment for a time.
So ask them: "Are the daughters for your Lord, while the sons are for them?"
Or did We create the angels as females while they witnessed?
Indeed, it is out of their falsehood that they say,
"The son of God." They are liars.
Has He chosen the daughters over the sons?
What is wrong with you, how do you judge?
Will you not remember?
Or do you have a clear proof?
Bring forth your book, if you are truthful.
They invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn. But the Jinn know that they will be gathered.
God be glorified from what they describe.
Except for God's servants who are faithful.
As for you and what you serve.
You cannot lead away from Him.
Except those who are destined to hell.
Every one of us has a destined place.
We are the ones who are in columns.
We are the ones that glorify.
They used to say,
"If only we had received a reminder from the previous generations,"
"We would have surely been God's loyal servants."
But they rejected it. They will come to know.
Our word had been decreed to Our servants who were sent.
That they would be made victorious.
That Our soldiers are the winners.
So turn away from them for awhile.
Observe them; for they will see.
Do they seek to hasten Our retribution?
Then, when it descends into their courtyard, evil will be the morning, for they have already been warned.
Turn away from them for awhile.
Observe; for they will see.
Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of greatness, for what they have described.
Peace be upon the messengers.
Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds.
S90, and the Quran that contains the Reminder.*
Indeed, those who have rejected are in false pride and defiance.
How many a generation have We destroyed before them. They called out when it was far too late.
They were surprised that a warner has come to them from among themselves. The ingrates said, "This is a magician, a liar."
"Has he made the gods into One god? This is indeed a strange thing!"
The leaders among them went out: "Walk away, and remain patient to your gods. This thing can be turned back."
"We never heard of this from the people before us. This is but an innovation."
"Has the remembrance been sent down to him, from between all of us!" Indeed, they are doubtful of My reminder. They have not yet tasted My retribution.*
Or do they have the treasures of mercy of your Lord, the Noble, the Grantor.
Or do they possess the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them? Then let them bring their own solutions.
The opposing troops they have gathered will be defeated.
Rejecting before them were the people of Noah, Aad, and Pharaoh with the planks.
And Thamud, and the people of Lot, the dwellers of the Woods; such were the opponents.
Each of them rejected the messengers, therefore My retribution came to be.
What these people are waiting for is a single scream, from which they will not recover.
They said, "Our Lord, hasten for us our punishment, before the day of Reckoning."
Be patient to what they say, and recall Our servant David, the resourceful. He was obedient.
We committed the mountains to glorify with him, during dusk and dawn.
The birds were gathered; all were obedient to him.
We strengthened his kingship, and We gave him the wisdom and the ability to make sound judgment.
Did the news come to you of the disputing party who came over into the temple enclosure?
When they entered upon David, he was startled by them. They said, "Have no fear. We are two who have disputed, and one has wronged the other, so judge between us with truth, and do not wrong us, and guide us to the right path."
"This is my brother and he owns ninety nine lambs, while I own one lamb; so he said to me: Let me take care of it' and he pressured me."*
He said, "He has wronged you by asking to combine your lambs with his lambs. Many who mix their properties take advantage of one another, except those who acknowledge and do good works, and these are very few." David guessed that We had tested him, so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, and fell down kneeling, and repented.*
So We forgave him in this matter. For him with Us is a near position, and a beautiful abode.
O David, We have made you a successor on earth. Therefore, you shall judge among the people with truth, and do not follow desire, lest it diverts you from the path of God. Indeed, those who stray off the path of God will have a severe retribution for forgetting the day of Reckoning.
We did not create the heaven and the earth, and everything between them, in vain. Such is the thinking of those who rejected. Therefore, because of the fire woe to those who have rejected.
Or shall We treat those who acknowledge and do good works as We treat those who make corruption on earth? Or shall We treat the righteous as the wicked?
A book that We have sent down to you, that is blessed, so that they may reflect upon its signs, and so that those with intelligence will take heed.
To David We granted Solomon. What an excellent and obedient servant.
When, during dusk, well trained horses were displayed before him.
He said, "I enjoyed the good of materials more than I enjoyed remembering my Lord, until it became totally dark!"*
"Send them back." He then rubbed their legs and necks.
We tested Solomon and placed a corpse on his throne, but he then repented.
He said, "My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingship that will never be attained by anyone after me. You are the Grantor."
So, We committed the wind to run by his command, raining gently where he directed it.
The devils, builders and divers.
Others, held by restraints.
"This is Our gift, so you may spend or withhold, without any repercussions."
He has deserved a near position with Us, and a wonderful abode.
Recall Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord: "The devil has afflicted me with an illness and pain."
"Strike with your foot, here is a cold spring to wash with and to drink."
We restored his family to him along with a group like them, as a mercy from Us; and a reminder for those who possess intelligence.
"Take in your hand a bundle and travel with it, and do not break your oath." We found him steadfast. What a good servant! He was obedient.
Recall Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They were resourceful, and with vision.
We had chosen them to enforce awareness of the Hereafter.
They are with Us of the elite, the best.
Recall Ishmael, Elisha, and Isaiah; all are among the best.
This is a reminder, and the righteous will have a wonderful abode.
The gardens of Eden, whose gates will be open for them.
Reclining therein, they will be invited to many fruits and drinks.
With them are attendants with a splendid look and of equal age.
This is what you have been promised for the day of Reckoning.
Such is Our provisions, it does not run out.
This is so, and for the transgressors is a miserable destiny.
Hell is where they burn. What a miserable abode!
This is so, and let them taste a boiling drink and bitter food.
Other multitudes that are similar to that.
Here is another group to be thrown into hell with you. "We have no welcome for them, for they shall burn in the fire."
They said, "No, you are the ones without welcome. It was you who misled us, so here is the result!"
They said, "Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, then double their retribution in the fire!"
They said, "Why do we not see some men whom we used to count among the wicked?"
"Did we mock them erroneously, or have our eyes failed to find them?"
Surely, this is in truth the feuding of the people of hell.
Say, "I am but a warner; and there is no god besides God, the One, the Supreme."
"The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; the Noble, the Forgiving."
Say, "It is awesome news."
"From which you turn away."
"I had no knowledge of the command up high that they had quarreled."
"It is only inspired to me that I am a clear warner."
For your Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a human being from clay."
"So when I have evolved him, and breathed into him from My Spirit, then you shall submit to him."
The angels submitted, all of them,
Except Satan; he turned arrogant, and became one of the ingrates.
He said, "O Satan, what prevented you from submitting to what I have created by My hands? Are you too arrogant? Or are you one of those exalted?"
He said, "I am better than he; You created me from fire, and created him from clay."
He said, "Therefore exit from it, you are outcast."
"My curse will be upon you until the day of judgment."
He said, "My Lord, respite me till the day they are resurrected."
He said, "Then, you are granted respite,"
"Until the appointed day."
He said, "By Your majesty, I will mislead them all."
"Except for Your servants who are loyal."
He said, "The truth, and the truth is what I say.
That I will fill hell with you and all those who follow you."
Say, "I do not ask you for any wage, nor am I a fraud."
"It is but a reminder for the worlds."
"You will come to know its news after awhile."
The sending down of the book is from God, the Noble, the Wise.
We have sent down to you the book with truth, so serve God while devoting the system to Him.*
Absolutely, to God is the true system. Those who set up allies besides Him: "We only serve them so that they may bring us closer to God." God will judge between them in what they dispute. Surely, God does not guide him who is a liar, an ingrate.*
If God wished to take a son, He could have exalted from among His creation what He pleases. Be He glorified; He is God, the One, the Supreme.
He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He rolls the night over the day, and He rolls the day over the night. He committed the sun and the moon, each running for an appointed term. Absolutely, He is the Noble, the Forgiving.*
He created you from one person, then He made from it its mate. He sent down to you eight pairs of the livestock. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, a creation after a creation in triple darkness. Such is God your Lord. To Him belongs the sovereignty. There is no god besides Him. How is it then you deviate?
If you reject, then know that God is in no need of you, and He dislikes rejection for His servants. If you are appreciative, He is pleased for you. None shall bear the burdens of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of everything you had done. He is fully aware of what is inside the chests.
When the human being is afflicted with adversity, he implores his Lord, turning in repentance to Him. But then, when He grants him a blessing from Him, he forgets his previous imploring, and sets up equals with God, in order to mislead others from His path. Say, "Enjoy your rejection for a while; for you are of the dwellers of the fire."
As for one who is meditating in the night, prostrating and standing, fearing the Hereafter, and seeking the mercy of his Lord. Say, "Are those who know equal to those who do not know?" Only those who possess understanding will remember.
Say, "O servants who acknowledged, be aware of your Lord." For those who worked righteousness in this world will be a good reward, and God's earth is spacious. Those who steadfastly persevere will receive their recompense fully, without reckoning.
Say, "I have been commanded to serve God, devoting the system to Him.*
I was commanded to be the frontrunner of those who peacefully surrender."
Say, "I fear, if I disobeyed my Lord, the retribution of a great day."
Say, "God is the One I serve, devoting my system to Him.
Therefore, serve whatever you wish besides Him." Say, "The losers are those who lose themselves, and their families, on the day of resurrection. Indeed, such is the real loss."
They will have coverings of fire from above them and below them. It is as such that God makes His servants fearful: "O My servants, you shall reverence Me."
For those who avoid serving evil, and turn to God in repentance, for them are glad tidings. So give the good news to My servants.
The ones who listen to what is being said, and then follow the best of it. These are the ones whom God has guided, and these are the ones who possess intelligence.*
As for those who have deserved the retribution; can you save those who are in the fire?
But those who reverence their Lord, they will have dwellings constructed upon dwellings, with rivers flowing beneath them. God's promise; God does not break the promise.
Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky, and causes it to become streams through the land, then He produces with it plants of various colors, then they grow until they turn yellow, then He makes them dry and broken? In this is a reminder for those of understanding.
If God opens one's chest to peacefully surrender, then he will be on a light from his Lord. So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembering God. They have gone far astray.
God has sent down the best hadith, a book that is consistent, relating/contrasting/repeating. The skins of those who reverence their Lord shiver from it, then their skins and their hearts soften up to the remembrance of God. Such is God's guidance; He guides with it whoever He wills. For whomever God misguides, then none can guide him.*
As for he who saves his face from the terrible retribution on the day of resurrection; and it will be said to the transgressors: "Taste for what you have earned."
Those before them have denied, and thus the retribution came to them from where they did not perceive.
So God made them taste the humiliation in this worldly life, but the retribution in the Hereafter is far greater, if only they knew.
We have cited for the people in this Quran from every example, that they may take heed.
A compilation in Arabic, without any distortion, that they may be righteous.*
God cites the example of a man who has partners that dispute with each other, and a man who has given to dealing with only one man. Are they the same? Praise be to God; most of them do not know.*
You will die, and they will die.
Then, on the day of resurrection, you will quarrel at your Lord.
Who then is more wicked than one who lies about God, and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not in hell an abode for the ingrates?
Those who came with the truth, and acknowledged it, these are the righteous.
They shall have what they wish at their Lord. Such is the reward for the good doers.
So that God may cancel for them the worst that they did, and He may recompense them their reward for the best of what they used to do.
Is God not sufficient for His servant? They frighten you with others beside Him. Whomever God sends astray, then for him there will be no guide.
Whomever God guides, then there will be none that can mislead him. Is God not Noble, with Vengeance?
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" they will say, "God." Say, "Do you see what you call on besides God, If God wanted any harm for me, can they alleviate His harm? Or if He wanted a mercy for me, can they hold back his mercy?" Say, "God is sufficient for me; in Him those who trust shall put their trust."
Say, "O my people, work according to your way, and I will work.
You will come to know to whom the humiliating retribution will come, and on whom descends the eternal retribution."
We have sent down to you the book for the people with truth. Then, whoever is guided is guided for himself, and whoever goes astray goes astray to his own loss. You are not a keeper over them.
God takes the person when it dies, and during their sleep. He then keeps those that have been overtaken by death, and He sends the others back until a predetermined time. In that are signs for a people who will think.
Or have they taken intercessors besides God? Say, "What if they do not possess any power, nor understanding?"
Say, "To God belong all intercessions." To Him belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, then to Him you will be returned.*
When God Alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not acknowledge the Hereafter are filled with aversion; and when others are mentioned beside Him, they rejoice!*
Say, "Our god, Initiator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen, You will judge between Your servants regarding what they disputed in."
If those who transgressed owned everything on earth, and its equivalent again with it, they would ransom it to avoid the terrible retribution on the day of resurrection. They will be shown by God what they did not expect.
The sinful works they had earned will be shown to them, and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock!
So when the human is touched by adversity, he implores Us, then when We bestow a blessing upon him, he says: "I attained this because of knowledge I had!" Indeed, it is a test, but most of them do not know.
Those before them have said the same thing, yet what they earned did not help them in the least.
So, they suffered the evil of what they had earned. Those who transgressed from among these will suffer the evil of what they earned; they cannot escape.
Do they not realize that God spreads the provision for whomever He chooses, and withholds? In that are signs for a people who acknowledge.
Say, "O My servants who transgressed against themselves, do not despair of God's mercy. For God forgives all sins. He is the Forgiver, the Compassionate."*
Repent to your Lord, and peacefully surrender to Him, before the retribution comes to you. Then you cannot be helped.
Follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your Lord, before the retribution comes to you suddenly when you least expect it.*
Lest a person will say, "How sorry I am for disregarding God's path; and I was certainly one of those who mocked."
Or say, "Had God guided me, I would have been among the righteous."
Or say, when it sees the retribution: "If only I could have another chance, I would be among the good doers."
Yes indeed, My signs came to you, but you denied them and turned arrogant, and became one of the ingrates.
On the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about God their faces will be blackened. Is there not an abode in hell for the arrogant ones?
God will save those who were righteous as their reward. No harm will touch them, nor will they grieve.
God is the Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all things.
To Him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those who rejected God's signs, they are the losers.
Say, "Do you order me to serve other than God, O you ignorant ones?"
He has inspired to you and to those before you, that if you set up partners, He will nullify all your work and you will be of the losers.
Therefore, you shall serve God, and be among the appreciative.
They have not given God His true worth; and the whole earth is within His fist on the day of resurrection, and the heavens will be folded in His right hand. Be He glorified; He is much too high above what they set up.
The horn will be blown, whereupon everyone in the heavens and the earth will be struck unconscious, except those spared by God. Then it will be blown another time, whereupon they will all rise up, looking.
The earth will shine with the light of its Lord, the record will be placed, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forth; it will then be judged between them with truth, and they will not be wronged.
Every person will be paid for whatever it did, for He is fully aware of everything they have done.
Those who rejected will be driven to hell in groups. When they reach it, and its gates are opened, its guards will say to them: "Did you not receive messengers from among you, who recited to you the signs of your Lord, and warned you about meeting this day?" They said, "Yes, but the promise of retribution was destined to be upon the ingrates."
It was said, "Enter the gates of hell, wherein you will abide. What a miserable destiny for the arrogant."
Those who reverenced their Lord will be driven to Paradise in groups. When they reach it, and its gates are opened, its guards will say to them: "Peace be upon you. You have done well, so enter to abide herein."
They said, "Praise be to God who has fulfilled His promise to us, and He made us inherit the earth, enjoying Paradise as we please. What a beautiful recompense for the workers!"
You will see the angels surrounding the center of control, glorifying the praise of their Lord. It will be judged between them with truth, and it will be said, "Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds"
H8M40*
The revelation of the book is from God, the Noble, the Knowledgeable.
Forgiver of sins, and acceptor of repentance, severe in retribution, with ability to reach. There is no god other than Him, to Him is the ultimate destiny.
None dispute in God's signs except those who have rejected. So do not be impressed by their influence through the land.
Before they, the people of Noah denied and the opponents after them. Every nation plotted against their messenger to seize him, and they disputed by means of falsehood to defeat with it the truth. So I seized them; how then was My punishment!
As such, the word of your Lord has come to pass upon those who rejected, that they are the dwellers of the fire.
Those who carry the throne and all those around it glorify the praise of their Lord, and acknowledge Him, and they seek forgiveness for those who have acknowledged: "Our Lord, You encompass all things with compassion and knowledge, so forgive those who repented and followed Your path, and spare them the agony of hell."
"Our Lord, and admit them into the gardens of Eden which You had promised for them and for those who did good of their fathers, their spouses, and their progeny. You are the Noble, the Wise."
"Save them from the sins. Whomever You save from the sins, on that day, You have treated him with compassion. That is the greatest triumph."
Those who had rejected will be told: "God's abhorrence towards you is greater than your abhorrence towards yourselves, for you were invited to acknowledge, but you chose to reject."
They will say, "Our Lord, You have made us die twice, and You have given us life twice. Now we have confessed our sins. Is there any way out of this path?"
This is because when God Alone was mentioned, you rejected, but when partners were associated with Him, you acknowledged. Therefore, the judgment is for God, the Most High, the Most Great.
He is the One who shows you His signs, and He sends down to you provisions from the sky. But none do remember except those who repent.
Therefore, call on God while devoting the system solely to Him, even if the ingrates dislike it.*
Possessor of the highest ranks, the One with the Throne. He sends the Spirit with His command upon whom He wills from His servants, so that they may warn of the day of Summoning.
The day when they will be exposed. None of them will hide anything from God. To whom is the sovereignty on this day? To God, the One, the Supreme.
Today, every person will be recompensed for what it had earned. There will be no injustice today. Truly, God is swift in reckoning.
Warn them of the imminent day, when the hearts will reach the throats, and many will be remorseful. For the transgressors there will be no friend, nor intercessor to be obeyed.
He knows what the eyes have seen, and what the chests conceal.
God judges with the truth, while those they call on besides Him do not judge with anything. Certainly, God is the Hearer, the Seer.
Have they not roamed the earth and seen what was the consequence of those who were before them? They used to be stronger than them, and had built more in the land. But God seized them for their sins, and they had no protector against God.
That is because their messengers used to come to them with proofs, but they rejected. Thus God seized them; for He is Mighty, severe in punishment.
We had sent Moses with Our signs, and a clear authority.
To Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun. But they said, "A lying magician!"*
Then, when the truth came to them from Us, they said, "Kill the children of those who acknowledged with him, and shame their women." But the scheming of the ingrates is always in error.
Pharaoh said, "Leave me to kill Moses, and let him call upon his Lord. I fear that he may change your system, or that he will cause evil to spread throughout the land."
Moses said, "I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who does not acknowledge the day of Reckoning."
An acknowledging man from among Pharaoh's people, who had concealed his acknowledgement, said, "Will you kill a man simply for saying:
"O my people, you have the kingship today throughout the land. But then who will save us against God's torment, should it come to us?" Pharaoh said, "I am only showing you what I see, and I am only guiding you to the right path."
The one who acknowledged said, "O my people, I fear for you the same fate as the day of the opponents."
"Like the fate of the people of Noah, Aad, and Thamud, and those after them. God does not wish any injustice for the servants."
"And, O my people, I fear for you the day of mutual blaming."
"A day when you will turn around and flee, you will have no protector besides God, and whomever God sends astray, then there is none who can guide him."
"Joseph had come to you before with proofs, but you remained in doubt regarding what he came to you with, until when he died, you said, "God will not send any messenger after him." It is such that God sends astray he who is a transgressor, doubter."*
Those who dispute about God's signs without any authority that has come to them, it is greatly abhorred by God and by those who acknowledge. God thus seals the hearts of every arrogant tyrant.
Pharaoh said, "O Haman, build for me a high platform that I may uncover the secrets."
"The secrets of the heavens, and that I can take a look at the god of Moses, although I think he is a liar." Thus the evil works of Pharaoh were made to appear correct to him, and he was blocked from the path. Pharaoh's scheming brought nothing but regret.
The one who acknowledged said, "O my people, follow me, and I will guide you to the right path."
"O my people, this worldly life is but an enjoyment, while the Hereafter is the permanent abode."
"Whosoever does an evil deed, he will not be requited except for its equivalent, and whosoever does good, whether male or female and is an acknowledger, so those will be admitted to Paradise, where they will receive provision without limit."
"And, O my people, why is it that I invite you to salvation, while you invite me to the fire!"
"You invite me to reject God, and place partners beside Him that I have no knowledge of, and I am inviting you to the Noble, the Forgiver."
"There is no doubt that what you invite me to has no basis in this world, nor in the Hereafter. Our ultimate return will be to God, and that the transgressors will be the dwellers of the fire."
"You will come to remember what I am telling you, and I leave my affair in this matter to God; God is the Seer of the servants."
So God protected him from the evil of what they schemed, while the people of Pharaoh have incurred the worst retribution.
The fire, which they will be exposed to morning and evening, and on the day when the moment is established: "Admit the people of Pharaoh into the most severe of the retribution."
When they argue in hell, the weak will say to those who were arrogant: "We used to be your followers, can you take from us any portion of the fire?"
Those who were arrogant will say, "We are all in it together, for God has passed judgment upon the servants."
Those who are in fire will say to the guardians of hell: "Call upon your Lord to reduce for us the retribution, by just one day!"
They will say, "Did not your messengers come to you with proofs?" They will reply: "Yes." They will say, "Then call out, for the call of the ingrates is nothing but in vain."
We will indeed grant victory to Our messengers and to those who acknowledged the worldly life, and on the day when the witnesses will rise.
A day when excuses will be of no help to the transgressors, and they will be cursed, and they will have the worst abode.
We have given Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inherit the book.
A guide and a reminder for those who possess intelligence.
So be patient, for the promise of God is true, and seek forgiveness for your sin, and glorify and praise your Lord at dusk and dawn.
Surely, those who dispute about God's signs without any authority given to them, there is nothing but arrogance in their chests, which they do not perceive. Therefore, seek refuge in God; He is the Hearer, the Seer.
The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of people, but most people do not know.
Not equal are the blind and the seer; nor those who acknowledge and do good works, and those who do evil. Little do you remember.
Surely the moment is coming, there is no doubt in it, but most people do not acknowledge.
Your Lord said, "Call on Me and I will respond to you." Surely, those who are too arrogant to serve Me, they will enter hell, forcibly.*
God, it is He Who has made for you the night to reside in and the day to see in. Surely, God provides many blessings upon the people, but most people are not thankful.
That is God, your Lord, Creator of all things. There is no god except He, so why do you deviate?
Thus, those who used to deny God's Signs were deviated.
God is the One who made the earth a habitat for you, and the sky as a structure, and He designed you; how beautifully he designed you! He provided you with good provisions. Such is God your Lord. Most Exalted is God, Lord of the worlds.*
He is the Living; there is no god except He. So call on Him while devoting the system for Him. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds.*
Say, "I have been forbidden from serving those whom you are calling upon besides God, since the proofs have come to me from my Lord. I have been commanded to peacefully surrender to the Lord of the worlds."*
He is the One who created you from dust, then from a seed, then from an embryo, then He brings you out as a child, then He lets you reach your maturity, then you become old, and some of you may pass away before this, and so that you may reach an appointed term, in order that you may understand.
He is the One who gives life and causes death. When He decides upon anything, He simply says to it: "Be" and it is.
Did you not see those who dispute about God's signs, how they have deviated?
Those who deny the book, and what We have sent Our messengers with. Therefore, they will come to know.
When the collars will be around their necks and in chains they will be dragged off.
To the boiling water, then in the fire they will be burned.*
Then it will be said to them: "Where are those that you have set up as partners
beside God?" They will say, "They have abandoned us. No, we used not to call on anything before!" Thus God leads the ingrates astray.
That was because you used to gloat on earth without any right, and for what you used to rejoice.
Enter the gates of hell, abiding therein. What a miserable abode for the arrogant ones.
So be patient, for the promise of God is true. Either We will show you some of what We have promised them, or We will let you die, then it is to Us that they will be returned.
We have sent messengers prior to you. Some of them We mentioned to you, and some We did not mention to you. It was not given to any messenger that he should bring a sign except by God's leave. So, when God's judgment is issued, the matter is decided with truth, and the followers of falsehood will be lost.*
God is the One who made the livestock for you that you may ride on some of them, and some of them you eat.
You have other benefits in them. That you may reach by them what is desired in your chests. On them and on the ships, you are carried.
He shows you His signs. So which of God's signs do you deny?
Have they not roamed the earth and noted the consequences for those who were before them? They used to be greater in number than they are and mightier in strength, and they had built more in the land. Yet, all that they had earned could not avail them.
Then, when their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were content with what they already had of the knowledge. What they ridiculed became their doom.
So when they saw Our might, they said, "We acknowledge God Alone, and we reject all the partners we used to set up!"
But their acknowledgement could not help them once they saw Our might. Such is God's sunna that has been established with His servants. The ingrates were then totally in loss.
H8M40*
A revelation from the Gracious, Compassionate.
A book whose signs are detailed, a compilation in Arabic for a people who know.*
A bearer of good news, and a warner. But most of them turn away; they do not hear.
They said, "Our hearts are sealed from what you invite us to, in our ears is deafness, and there is a barrier between us and you. So do what you will, and so will we."
Say, "I am no more than a human being like you. I am inspired that your god is One god, therefore you shall be upright towards Him and seek His forgiveness. Woe to those who set up partners."
"The ones who do not contribute towards betterment, and with regards to the Hereafter, they are those who acknowledge."
Surely, those who acknowledge and do good works, they will receive recompense without limit.
Say, "You are rejecting the One who created the earth in two days, and you set up equals with Him. This is the Lord of the worlds."*
He placed in it stabilizers from above it, and He blessed it and established its provisions in four equal days, to satisfy those who ask.
Then He settled to the heaven, while it was still gas, and He said to it, and to the earth: "Come willingly or unwillingly." They said, "We come willingly."*
Thus, He then made them into seven heavens in two days, and He inspired to every universe its affair. We adorned the lowest universe with lamps, and for protection. Such is the design of the Noble, the Knowledgeable.
But if they turn away, then say, "I have warned you of destruction like the destruction of Aad and Thamud."
When the messengers came to them, publicly and privately: "You shall not serve except God." They said, "Had our Lord willed, He would have sent angels. We are rejecting what you have been sent with."
As for Aad, they turned arrogant on earth, without any right, and they said, "Who is mightier than us in strength?" Did they not see that God, who created them, was mightier than them in strength? They were denying Our signs.
Consequently, We sent upon them violent wind, for a few miserable days, that We may let them taste the humiliating retribution in this life, and the retribution of the Hereafter is more humiliating; they can never win.
As for Thamud, We provided them with guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. Consequently, the blast of humiliating retribution annihilated them, because of what they earned.
We saved those who acknowledged and were righteous.
The day when the enemies of God will be gathered to the fire, forcibly.
When they come to it, their own hearing, eyes, and skins will bear witness to everything they had done.
They will say to their skins: "Why did you bear witness against us?" They will reply: "God made us speak; He is the One who causes everything to speak. He is the One who created you the first time, and to Him you return."
There was no way you could hide from the testimony of your own hearing, or your eyes, or your skins. In fact, you thought that God was unaware of much of what you do.
This is the kind of thinking about your Lord that has caused you to fail, and thus you became of the losers.
If they wait, then the fire will be their destiny, and if they beg to be excused, they will not be excused.
We assigned to them companions who adorned their present and past actions. Thus, the retribution has been deserved by them the same as previous nations of Jinn and humans; all of them were losers.
Those who rejected said, "Do not listen to this Quran and talk over it that you may succeed."
We will let those who have rejected taste a severe retribution. We will recompense them for the evil that they used to do.
Such is the recompense for God's enemies; the fire shall be their eternal abode, as a recompense for their discarding Our signs.
Those who have rejected will say, "Our Lord, show us those who have misled us from among the Jinn and humans so we can trample them under our feet, and render them the lowliest."
Surely, those who have said, "Our Lord is God," then they did right, the angels will descend upon them: "You shall not fear, nor shall you grieve. Rejoice in the good news of Paradise that you have been promised."
"We are your allies in this worldly life and in the Hereafter. There you will have anything your person desires, and in it you will have anything you ask for."
"A dwelling, from a Forgiver, Compassionate."
Who is better in saying than one who invites to God, and does good works, and says: "I am one of those who have peacefully surrendered."
Not equal are the good and the bad response. You shall resort to the one which is better. Thus, the one who used to be your enemy may become your best friend.
None can attain this except those who are patient. None can attain this except those who are extremely fortunate.
If the devil misleads you in anything, then you shall seek refuge with God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
From among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not prostrate to the sun, nor the moon; you shall prostrate to God who created them, if it is truly Him you serve.*
So, if they become arrogant, then those who are with your Lord glorify Him night and day, and they never despair.
From among His signs is that you see the land barren, then, as soon as We send down the water upon it, it shakes and grows. Surely, the One who revived it can revive the dead. He is capable of all things.
Surely, those who distort Our signs are not hidden from Us. Is one who is thrown into hell better, or one who comes secure on the day of resurrection? Do whatever you wish; He is Seer of everything you do.*
Surely, those who have rejected the Reminder when it came to them; and it is an Honorable book.*
No falsehood could enter it, presently or afterwards; a revelation from a Most Wise, Praiseworthy.*
What is being said to you is the same that was said to the messengers before you. Your Lord has forgiveness, and a painful retribution.
Had We made it a non-Arabic compilation, they would have said, "If only its signs were made clear!" Non-Arabic and Arabic, say, "For those who acknowledge, it is a guide and healing. As for those who reject, there is deafness in their ears, and they are blind to it. These will be called from a place far away."*
We have given Moses the book, but it was disputed in. Had it not been for your Lord's predetermined decision, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, they harbor many doubts about it.
Whoever does good works does so for his own person, and whoever works evil shall have the same. Your Lord does not wrong the servants.
To Him belongs the knowledge regarding the moment. No fruit emerges from its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give birth, except by His knowledge. On the day He asks them: "Where are My partners?" They will say, "By your leave, none of us will testify to that."*
They were abandoned by what they used to call on before, and they realized that there will be no escape.
The human being does not tire in imploring for good things. But if adversity touches him, he is disheartened, desperate!*
When We let him taste a mercy from Us after adversity had touched him, he will say, "This was by my actions, and I do not think that the moment will come to pass. Even if I am returned to my Lord, I will find at Him good things for me." Surely, We will inform the ingrates of all they had done, and We will let them taste the severe retribution.
When We bless the human being, he withdraws and turns away, and when he suffers any adversity, he implores in long prayers!
Say, "Do you see if this was from God and then you rejected it? Who is further astray than those who are in opposition?"
We will show them Our signs in the horizons, and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that this is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord is witness over all things?*
Indeed, they are in doubt about meeting their Lord; but He is Encompassing over all things.
H8M40*
A70S60Q100*
Similarly, inspiring you and those before you, is God, the Noble, the Wise.
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and He is the Most High, the Great.
The heavens would nearly shatter from above them, and the angels praise the glory of their Lord, and they ask forgiveness for those on earth. Surely, God is the Forgiver, the Compassionate.
Those who take allies besides Him, God is responsible for them; and you are not a guardian over them.
Thus We have inspired to you an Arabic compilation, so that you may warn the capital town and all around it, and to warn about the day of Gathering that is inevitable. A group will be in Paradise, and a group in hell.*
Had God willed, He could have made them one nation. But He admits whom He wills into His mercy. The transgressors will have neither an ally, nor helper.
Or have they taken allies besides Him? But God is the ally, and He is the One who resurrects the dead, and He is able to do all things.*
Anything you dispute in, then its judgment shall be with God. Such is God my Lord. In Him I put my trust, and to Him I repent.
Creator of the heavens and the earth. He created for you from among yourselves mates, and also mates for the livestock so they may multiply. There is nothing like unto Him. He is the Hearer, the Seer.*
To Him belongs the possessions of the heavens and the earth. He spreads out the provision for whomever He wills, and He measures it. He is fully aware of all things.
He has decreed for you the same system He ordained for Noah, and what We inspired to you, and what We ordained for Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: "You shall uphold this system, and do not divide in it." Intolerable for those who have set up partners is what you invite them towards. God chooses to Himself whoever/whomever He wills; He guides to Himself whoever repents.
They only divided after the knowledge had come to them, due to resentment among themselves. Had it not been for a predetermined decision from your Lord, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, those who inherited the book after them are full of doubts.
For that, you shall preach and be upright, as you have been commanded, and do not follow their wishes. Say, "I acknowledge all that God has sent down from book, and I was commanded to apply justice between you. God is our Lord and your Lord. We have our deeds and you have your deeds. There is no argument between us and you. God will gather us all together, and to Him is the ultimate destiny."
Those who debate about God, after they had been answered, their argument is nullified at their Lord. They have incurred a wrath, and will have a severe retribution.
God is the One who sent down the book with truth, and the balance. For all that you know, the moment may be very near.
Those who do not acknowledge it seek to hasten it, while those who acknowledge are concerned about it, and they know that it is the truth. Certainly, those who dispute the moment have gone far astray.
God is Gracious to His servants; He gives provisions for whomever He wills, and He is the Powerful, the Noble.
Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase for him his harvest. Whoever seeks the harvest of this world, We will give it to him, and he will have no share in the Hereafter.
Or do they have partners who decree for them a sharia which has not been authorized by God? If it were not for the word already given, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, the transgressors will have a painful retribution.*
You see the transgressors worried because of what they had done; and it will come back at them. As for those who acknowledged and do good works, they will be in the paradises of bliss. They will have what they wish from their Lord. This is the great blessing.
Such is the good news from God to His servants who acknowledge and do good works. Say, "I do not ask you for any wage, except that you show compassion to your relatives." Whosoever earns a good deed, We shall increase it for him in goodness. Surely, God is Forgiving, Appreciative.*
Or do they say, "He has fabricated lies about God!" If God willed, He could have sealed your heart. God erases the falsehood and affirms the truth with His words. He is fully aware of what is inside the chests.
He is the One who accepts the repentance from His servants, and He forgives the sins. He is fully aware of what you do.
Those who acknowledge and do good works respond to Him, and He increases for them His blessings. As for the ingrates, they have incurred a severe retribution.
If God were to increase the provision for His servants, they would transgress on earth; but He sends down what He wills in a measure. He is Ever-aware and Seer of His servants.
He is the One who sends down the rain after they had despaired, and spreads His mercy. He is the Supporter, the Praiseworthy.
From among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the creatures He spreads in them. He is able to gather them, if He wills.
Any misfortune that happens to you is a consequence of what your hands have earned. He overlooks much.
You can never escape, and you have none besides God as an ally or helper.
From His signs are the vessels that sail the sea like flags.
If He willed, He could still the winds, leaving them motionless on top of it. In that are signs for everyone who is patient, thankful.
Or He may drown them, for what they have earned. He overlooks much.
Those who dispute Our signs may know that they have no place to hide.
So whatever you are given is simply an enjoyment of the worldly life, and what is with God is far better and more lasting for those who acknowledge and put their trust in their Lord.
Those who avoid gross sins and lewdness, and when they are angered, they forgive.
Those who have responded to their Lord, and they hold the contact prayer, and their affairs are conducted by mutual consultation among themselves, and from Our provisions to them they give.*
They are those who seek justice when gross injustice befalls them.
The recompense for a crime shall be its equivalence, but whoever forgives and makes right, then his reward is upon God. He does not like the wrongdoers.
For any who demand action after being wronged, those are not committing any error.
The error is upon those who oppress the people, and they aggress in the land without cause. For these will be a painful retribution.
As for the patient and forgiving, that is an indication of strength.
Whomever God sends astray will not have any ally after Him. You will see the transgressors, when they see the retribution, saying: "Is there any way we can go back?"
You will see them being displayed to it, in fearful humiliation, and looking, while trying to avoid looking. Those who acknowledged will say, "The losers are those who lost themselves and their families on the day of resurrection. The transgressors will be in a lasting retribution."
They had no allies to help them against God. Whomever God misguides will never find the way.
Respond to your Lord before a day comes from God which cannot be averted. You will have no refuge for you on that day, nor an advocate.
But if they turn away, then We did not send you as their guardian. You are only required to deliver. When We let the human being taste compassion from Us, he becomes happy with it, and when adversity afflicts them because of what their hands have done, the human being becomes rejecting.
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He bestows daughters to whomever He wills, and bestows sons to whomever He wills.*
Or, He may bestow them with both daughters and sons, and He makes whom He wills sterile. He is Knowledgeable, Omnipotent.
It is not for any human being that God would speak to him, except through inspiration, or from behind a barrier, or by sending a messenger to inspire whom He wills by His leave. He is the Most High, Most Wise.
Thus, We inspired to you a revelation of Our command. You did not know what the book was, nor the acknowledgement. Yet, We made this a light to guide whomever We wish from among Our servants. Surely, you guide to a straight path.*
The path of God; to Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Ultimately, all matters revert to God.
H8M40*
The evident book.
We have made it into an Arabic compilation, perhaps you may understand.*
It is held honorable and wise in the master record with Us.
Shall We take away the reminder from you, because you are a transgressing people?
How many a prophet did We send to the previous generations!
Every time a prophet went to them, they ridiculed him.
We have destroyed those who were even more powerful than these, and the example of the previous generations has already been given.
If you asked them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They will say, "They were created by the One who is the Noble, the Knowledgeable."
He is the One who made the earth a habitat for you, and He made pathways in it that you may be guided.
He is the One who sends down water from the sky, in exact measure. We then revive with it a dead land. Similarly, you will be brought out.
He is the One who created all the pairs. He made for you ships and the livestock to ride.
So that you may settle on their backs; and then when you have settled on them you may recall your Lord's blessing, by saying: "Glory be to the One who commits this for us, and we could not have done so by ourselves."
"We will ultimately return to our Lord."
They assigned a share to Him from His own servants! The human being is clearly denying.
Or has He selected daughters from among His creation, while He has left you with the sons?
When one of them is given news of what he cites as an example for the Gracious, his face becomes dark, and he is miserable!
"What good is an offspring that is brought up to be beautiful, and cannot help in a fight?"
They have claimed the angels who are with the Gracious are females! Have they been made witness to their creation? We will record their testimony, and they will be asked.
They said, "If the Gracious willed, we would not have served them." They have no knowledge of this; they only conjecture.
Or have We given them a book before this which they are upholding?
The fact is, they have said, "We found our fathers following a certain way, and we are following in their footsteps."
Similarly, We did not send a warner to a town, except its privileged hedonists said, "We found our fathers following a certain way, and we are being guided in their footsteps."
He said, "What if I brought to you better guidance than what you found your fathers upon?" They said, "We reject the message you deliver."
Consequently, We took revenge upon them. So see what the consequence of the deniers was!
When Abraham said to his father and his people: "I am innocent of what you serve."
"Except for the One who initiated me, He will guide me."
He made it a word to last in his subsequent generations; perhaps they may turn back.
Indeed, I have given these people and their fathers enjoyment, until the truth came to them, and a clarifying messenger.
When the truth came to them, they said, "This is magic, and we reject it."
They said, "If only this Quran was sent down to a great man from the two towns!"
Is it they who assign your Lord's mercy? We have assigned their shares in this worldly life, and We raised some of them above others in ranks, so that they would take one another in service. The mercy from your Lord is far better than what they amass.
If it were not that all the people would become one cluster, We would have provided for those who reject the Gracious silver roofs for their homes, and stairs upon which they could ascend.
For their homes, gates, and furnishings on which they could recline.
Many ornaments. All these are the pleasures of this worldly life. The Hereafter with your Lord is for the righteous.
Whosoever turns away from the remembrance of the Gracious, We appoint a devil to be his constant companion.
They hinder from the path, but they think they are guided!
Until he comes to Us, he will say, "Oh, I wish that between you and me were the distance of the two easts. What a miserable companion!"
It would not benefit you this day, for you have transgressed; you are partners in the retribution.
Can you make the deaf hear, or can you guide the blind and those who are far astray?
For when We take you away, We may seek revenge on them.
Or We may show you what We promised for them; We are in full control over them.
You shall hold on to what is inspired to you; you are on a straight path.
This is indeed a reminder for you and your people; and you will all be questioned.
Ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before you: "Did We ever appoint gods besides the Gracious to be served?"
We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leaders, saying: "I am a messenger of the Lord of the worlds."
But when he came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them.
Every sign We showed them was greater than the one before it, and We seized them with the torment, perhaps they would revert.
They said, "O you magician, implore your Lord for us according to what He has agreed with you; we will then be guided."
But when We removed the torment from them, they broke their word.
Pharaoh proclaimed among his people: "O my people, do I not possess the kingship of Egypt, and these rivers that flow below me? Do you not see?"
"Am I not better than this one who is despised and can barely be understood?"
"Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him, or the angels accompanying him?"
He thus convinced his people, and they obeyed him; they were a wicked people.
So when they persisted in opposing Us, We sought revenge from them, and drowned them all.
We thus made them a thing of the past (salaf), and an example for the others.*
When the son of Mary was cited as an example, your people turned away from it.
They said, "Are our gods better or is he?" They only cited this to argue with you. Indeed, they are a quarrelsome people.
He was no more than a servant whom We blessed, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel.
If We willed, We could have made some of you angels to be successors on earth.
He was a sign for knowing the moment. You should have no doubt about it. Follow Me; this is a straight path.*
Let not the devil repel you; he is to you a clear enemy.
When Jesus came with the proofs, he said, "I have come to you with the wisdom, and to clarify some of the matters in which you dispute. So be aware of God and obey me."
"God is my Lord and your Lord. So serve Him. This is a straight path."
The groups disputed among themselves. Woe to those who have been wicked from the retribution of a painful day.
Do they only wait for the moment to come to them suddenly, while they do not perceive?
Friends on that day will become enemies of one another, except for the righteous.
"O My servants, you will have no fear on this day, nor will you grieve."
They are the ones who acknowledged Our signs, and had peacefully surrendered.
"Enter Paradise, together with your spouses, in happiness."
They will be served with golden trays and cups, and they will find everything the self desires and the eyes wish for, and you will abide therein forever.
This is the Paradise that you have inherited, in return for your works.
In it you will have all kinds of fruits, from which you eat.
Surely, the criminals will abide in the retribution of hell forever.
It will not be removed from them; they will be confined therein.
We did not wrong them, but it was they who were the wrongdoers.
They called out: "O Malek/angel, please let your Lord terminate us!" He will say, "No, you are remaining."
We have come to you with the truth, but most of you hate the truth.
Or have they devised some scheme? We will also devise.
Or do they think that We do not hear their secrets and private counsel? Yes indeed; and Our messengers are with them, recording.
Say, "If the Gracious had a son, I would be the first to serve!"
Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, from what they describe.
So leave them to speak nonsense and play until they meet their day, which they have been promised.
He is the One who is a god in the heaven and a god on earth. He is the Wise, the Knowledgeable.
Blessed is the One who possesses the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; and with Him is the knowledge of the moment, and to Him you will be returned.
Those whom they call on beside Him do not possess any intercession; except those who bear witness to the truth, and they fully know.*
If you asked them who created them, they would say, "God." Why then do they deviate?
It will be said, "O my Lord, these are a people who do not acknowledge."
So disregard them and say, "Peace." For they will come to know.
H8M40*
The clarifying book
We have sent it down in a blessed night. Surely, We were to warn.
In it, is a decree for every matter of wisdom.
A decree from Us. Surely, We were to send messengers.
A mercy from your Lord. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them. If you were certain!
There is no god except Him. He gives life and causes death; your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors.
No; they are in doubt, playing.
Therefore, watch for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke/gas.
It will envelop the people: "This is a painful retribution!"
"Our Lord, remove the retribution from us; we are those who acknowledge."
How is it that now they remember, while a clarifying messenger had come to them?
But they turned away from him and said, "Clearly educated, but crazy!"
We will remove the retribution in a while; you will then revert back.
On the day We strike the great strike, We will avenge.
We had tested before them the people of Pharaoh, and an honorable messenger came to them.
"Restore to me the servants of God. I am a trustworthy messenger to you."
"And, do not transgress against God. I come to you with clear authority."
"I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, should you stone/reject me."
"If you do not wish to acknowledge, then leave me alone."
Subsequently, he called on his Lord: "These are a criminal people."
You shall travel with My servants during the night; you will be pursued.
Cross the sea quickly; their troops will be drowned.
How many paradises and springs did they leave behind?
Crops and luxurious dwellings?
Blessings that they enjoyed?
Thus it was; and We caused another people to inherit it.
Neither the heaven, nor the earth wept over them, and they were not reprieved.
We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating agony.
From Pharaoh; he was a transgressing tyrant.
We have chosen them, out of knowledge, over the worlds.
We granted them signs, which constituted a great test.
These people now are saying:
"There is nothing but our first death; and we will never be resurrected!"
"So bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful!"
Are they better or the people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them, they were criminals.
We have not created the heavens and the earth, and everything between them, for mere play.
We did not create them except with the truth, but most of them do not know.
Surely, the day of Separation is the appointment for them all.
That is the day when no friend can help his friend in any way; nor will they be helped.*
Except the one whom God treated with compassion. He is the Noble, the Compassionate.
Surely, the tree of Bitterness
Will be the food for the sinful.
Like hot oil, it will boil in the stomachs.
Like the boiling of liquid.
"Take him and throw him into the midst of hell."
"Then pour upon his head the retribution of boiling liquid."
"Taste this; surely you are the noble, the generous!"
Surely, this is what you used to doubt!
The righteous will be in a place of security.
Among paradises and springs.
Wearing silk and satin; facing each other.
So it is, and We coupled them with wonderful companions.*
They enjoy in it all kinds of fruits, in perfect peace.
They do not taste death therein except for the first death, and He has spared them the retribution of hell.*
As a blessing from your Lord. Such is the great triumph.
We have thus made it easy in your language, perhaps they may take heed.
Therefore, keep watch; for they too will keep watch.
H8M40*
The revelation of the book is from God, the Noble, the Wise.
In the heavens and the earth are signs for those who acknowledge.
In your creation, and what creatures He puts forth are signs for people who are certain.
The alternation of the night and the day, and what God sends down from the sky of provisions to revive the land after its death, and the changing of the winds, are signs for a people who understand.
These are God's signs that We recite to you with truth. So, in which hadith, after God and His signs, do they acknowledge?*
Woe to every sinful fabricator.
He hears God's signs being recited to him, then he persists arrogantly, as if he never heard them. Give him news of a painful retribution.
If he learns anything from Our signs, he makes fun of them. For these will be a humiliating retribution.
Waiting for them is hell. What they earned will not help them, nor those whom they have taken as allies besides God, and for them is a terrible retribution.
This is guidance. Those who reject the signs of their Lord, for them is an affliction of a painful retribution.
God is the One who committed the sea in your service, so that the ships can sail in it by His command, and that you may seek of His provisions, and that you may be appreciative.
He committed in your service all that is in the heavens and in the earth; all from Him. In that are signs for a people who reflect.
Say to those who acknowledged: they should forgive those who do not look forward to the days of God. He will fully recompense people for whatever they have earned.
Whoever works good does so for himself, and whoever works evil will suffer it. Then to your Lord you will be returned.
We had given the Children of Israel the book and the judgment, and the prophethood, and We provided them with good provisions; and We preferred them over the worlds.
We gave them proof in the matter, but then they disputed after the knowledge had come to them, out of jealousy amongst themselves. Your Lord will judge them on the day of resurrection regarding everything that they have disputed.
Then We have established you on the correct path; so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know.
They cannot help you against God in the least. The transgressors are allies to one another, while God is the Protector of the righteous.
This is a physical evidence for the people, and guidance and a mercy for a people who are certain.
Or do those who work evil expect that We would treat them the same as those who acknowledge and do good works, in their present life and their death? Miserable is how they judge.
God created the heavens and the earth with truth, and so that every person may be recompensed for whatever it earned, and they will not be wronged.
Have you seen the one who took his fancy as his god, and God led him astray, despite his knowledge, and He sealed his hearing and his heart, and He made a veil on his eyes? Who then can guide him after God? Will you not remember?
They said, "There is nothing but this worldly life; we die and we live and nothing destroys us except the passing of time!" They have no knowledge about this; they only conjecture.
When Our clear signs are recited to them, their only argument is to say, "Then bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful."
Say, "God gives you life, then He puts you to death, then He will gather you to the day of resurrection, in which there is no doubt. But most people do not know."
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. On the day the moment comes to pass, on that day the falsifiers will lose.
You will see every nation lined up together. Every nation will be called to its record. "Today, you are recompensed for everything you have done."
"This is Our record; it utters the truth about you. We have been recording everything you did."
As for those who acknowledge and did good works, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. Such is the clear triumph.
As for those who reject: "Were not My signs recited to you, but you turned arrogant and were a criminal people?"
When it was said, "Surely God's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the moment," you said, "We do not know what the moment is! We are full of conjecture about it; we are not certain."
The evils of their works will become evident to them, and the very thing they ridiculed will be their doom.
It will be said to them: "Today We will forget you, just as you forgot the meeting of this day. Your abode is the fire, and you will have no helpers."
"This is because you took God's signs in mockery, and you were deceived by the worldly life." So from this day, they will never exit therefrom, nor will they be excused.
All praise belong to God; the Lord of the heavens, and the Lord of the earth; the Lord of the worlds.
To Him belongs all majesty in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise.
H8M40*
The revelation of the book from God, the Noble, the Wise.
We did not create the heavens and the earth, and everything between them except with truth, and for an appointed time. Those who reject turn away from what they are being warned with.
Say, "Do you see those that you call on besides God? Show me what they have created on the earth, or do they have a share in the heavens? Bring me a book before this, or any trace of knowledge, if you are truthful."
Who is more astray than one who calls on others besides God that do not respond to him even till the day of resurrection? They are totally unaware of the calls to them!
At the time when people are gathered, they will be enemies for them, and they will reject their service.*
When Our clear signs are recited to them, those who rejected said of the truth that came to them: "This is evidently magic!"
Or do they say, "He fabricated this!" Say, "If I fabricated this, then you cannot protect me at all from God. He is fully aware of what you say. He suffices as a witness between me and you. He is the Forgiver, the Compassionate."
Say, "I am no different from the other messengers, nor do I know what will happen to me or to you. I only follow what is inspired to me. I am no more than a clear warner"
Say, "Do you see that if it were from God, and you rejected it, and a witness from the Children of Israel testified to its similarity, and he has acknowledged, while you have turned arrogant? Surely, God does not guide the wicked people."*
Those who had rejected said regarding those who had acknowledged: "If it were any good, they would not have beaten us to it." When they are not able to be guided by it, they will say, "This is an old fabrication!"*
Before this was the book of Moses, as a role model and a mercy. This is an authenticating book in an Arabic tongue, so that you may warn those who have transgressed, and to give good news to the righteous.
Surely, those who said, "Our Lord is God," then they lead a righteous life, there is no fear for them, nor will they grieve.
These are the dwellers of Paradise, abiding therein, a reward for what they used to do.
We instructed the human being to honor his parents. His mother bore him with hardship, gave birth to him in hardship, and his weaning lasts thirty months. Until he has attained his maturity, and reaches forty years, he says: "My Lord, direct me to appreciate the blessings You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and to do righteousness that pleases You. Let my progeny be righteous. I have repented to You; I am of those who have peacefully surrendered."*
It is from these that We accept the best of their deeds, and We shall overlook their sins, among the dwellers of Paradise. This is the promise of truth that they had been promised.
The one who says to his parents: "Enough of you! Are you promising me that I will be resurrected, when the generations who died before me never came back?" While they both will implore God: "Woe to you; acknowledge! For God's promise is the truth." He would say, "This is nothing but tales from the past!"
These are the ones against whom the retribution has been deserved in nations who had come before them of humans and Jinn; they are the losers.
To each will be degrees according to what they did; He will recompense them and they will not be wronged.
On the day when those who rejected will be displayed to the fire: "You have wasted the good things given to you during your worldly life, and you took pleasure in it. Consequently, today you will be recompensed with a shameful retribution for your arrogance in the land without any right, and for your evil works."
Recall that the brother of Aad warned his people at the dunes, while numerous warnings were also delivered before him and with him: "You shall not serve except God. For I fear for you the retribution of a great day."
They said, "Have you come to us to divert us away from our gods? Then bring us what you are promising us, if you are truthful!"
He said, "The knowledge of it is with God; and I only convey to you what I was sent with. However, I see that you are a people who are ignorant."
Then when they saw the dense cloud heading towards their valley, they said, "This is a dense cloud that will bring to us much needed rain!" No, this is what you had asked to be hastened; a violent wind with a painful retribution.
It destroys everything by the command of its Lord. Thus they became such that nothing could be seen except their homes. We thus requite the criminal people.
We had established them in the same way as We established you, and provided them with the hearing, and the eyesight, and the heart. But their hearing, eyesight, and hearts did not help them at all. This is because they used to disregard God's signs, and they were stricken by what they used to mock!
We have destroyed the towns around you, after We had explained the proofs, perhaps they would repent.
Why then did the idols they set up to bring them closer to God fail to help them? Instead, they abandoned them. Such was their lie, and what they fabricated.
We sent to you a small number of Jinn, in order to let them listen to the Quran. So when they arrived there, they said, "Pay attention." Then, when it was finished, they returned to their people, to warn them.
They said, "O our people, we have heard a book that was sent down after Moses, authenticating what is present with him. It guides to the truth; and to a Straight Path."
"O our people, respond to God's caller, and acknowledge Him. He will then forgive your sins, and spare you a painful retribution."
Whosoever does not respond to God's caller, then he cannot escape on the earth, and he will not have besides Him any allies. These are the ones who have gone far astray.
Did they not see that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not tired by their creation, is able to revive the dead? Yes indeed; He is able to do all things.
The day those who do not appreciate are displayed to the fire: "Is this not the truth?" They will answer: "Yes indeed, by our Lord." He will say, "Then taste the retribution for what you had rejected."
Therefore, be patient like the messengers of strong-will did before you and do not be in haste regarding them. On the day they will see what they have been promised; it will be as if they had not remained except for one moment of a single day. A proclamation: "Are any destroyed except for the wicked people?"
Those who rejected and repelled from the path of God, He will mislead their works.
Those who acknowledge and do good works, and acknowledge what was sent down to Muhammad, for it is the truth from their Lord, He cancels for them their sins, and relieves their concern.
That is because those who reject followed falsehood, while those who acknowledge followed the truth from their Lord. God thus cites for the people their examples.
So, if you encounter those who have rejected, then strike the control center until you overcome them. Then bind them securely. You may either set them free or ransom them, until the war ends. That, and had God willed, He alone could have beaten them, but He thus tests you by one another. As for those who get killed in the cause of God, He will never let their deeds be put to waste.*
He will guide them, and relieve their concerns.
He will admit them into Paradise, which He has described to them.
O you who acknowledge, if you support God, He will support you, and make your foothold firm.
Those who rejected, for them is destruction; and He has misled their works.
That is because they hated what God sent down, thus He nullifies their works.
Did they not roam the land and note what the end was for those before them? God destroyed them and the ingrates in a similar fate.
This is because God is the Master for those who acknowledge, while those who do not appreciate have no master.*
God admits those who acknowledge and do good works to paradises with rivers flowing beneath them. As for those who reject, they are enjoying and eating as the cattle eat, and the fire will be their abode.
Many a town was stronger than your own town, which drove you out. We destroyed them, and there was none who could help them.
Is one who is based on proof from his Lord, as one for whom his evil works have been adorned for him and they followed their desires?
The example of Paradise; that the righteous have been promised with rivers of pure water, rivers of milk whose taste does not change, rivers of intoxicants that are delicious for the drinkers, and rivers of strained honey. For them in it are all kinds of fruits, and forgiveness from their Lord. Compare it to that of those who abide in the fire, and are given to drink boiling water that cuts up their intestines.*
Some of them listen to you, until when they go out from you, they say to those who have been given the knowledge: "What did he say?" Those are the ones whom God has sealed upon their hearts, and they followed their desires.
Those who are guided, He increases their guidance, and grants them their righteousness.
So are they waiting until the moment comes to them suddenly? For its conditions have already been met. But once it comes to them, how will they benefit from their message?*
So know that there is no god besides God, and ask forgiveness of your sins and also for the acknowledging men and acknowledging women. God knows your movements and your place of rest.
Those who acknowledge say, "If only a chapter is sent down!" But when a resolute chapter is sent down, and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those who have a disease in their hearts look at you, as if death had already come to them. It thus revealed them.
Obedience and to speak righteousness until the matter is decided, then if they trust God it would be better for them.
So do you plan that when you turn away, that you will corrupt the land and sever your family ties?
These are the ones whom God has cursed and thus He made them deaf and blinded their sight.
Do they not reflect on the Quran? Or are there locks on their hearts?
Surely, those who reverted back, after the guidance has been made clear to them, the devil has enticed them and led them on.
That is because they said to those who hated what God had sent down: "We will obey you in certain matters." God knows their secrets.
So how will it be when the angels put them to death, striking their faces and their backs?
That is because they followed what angered God, and they hated what pleased Him. Thus, He nullified their works.
Or did those who harbor a disease in their hearts think that God would not bring out their evil thoughts?
If We wished, We would show them to you so you would recognize them by their looks. However, you can recognize them by their speech. God is fully aware of your works.
We will test you until We know those who strive among you and those who are patient. We will bring out your qualities.
Those who have rejected and repelled from the path of God, and stood against the messenger after the guidance has been made clear for them, they will not harm God in the least, and He will nullify their works.
O you who acknowledge, obey God, and obey the messenger. Do not render your work in vain.
Surely, those who rejected and repelled from the path of God, then they died while still rejecting, God will never forgive them.
Therefore, do not be weak in calling for peace. You are on a higher moral ground, and God is with you. He will not waste your efforts.
This worldly life is no more than play and vanity. But if you acknowledge and lead a righteous life, He will reward you, and He will not ask you for your wealth.
If He were to ask you for it, to the extent of creating a hardship for you, you would become stingy, and your hidden evil might be exposed.
Here you are being invited to spend in the cause of God, but some among you turn stingy. Whoever is stingy is only being stingy on himself. God is the Rich, while you are the poor. If you turn away, He will substitute another people instead of you, then they will not be like you.
We have given you a clear conquest.
So that God may forgive your present sins, as well as those past, and so that He may complete His blessings upon you, and guide you on a straight path.
God will grant you a conquest which is mighty.
He is the One who sends down tranquility into the hearts of those who acknowledge, so that they may increase in acknowledgement along with their present acknowledgement. To God belongs the soldiers of the heavens and the earth, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
That He may admit the acknowledging men and acknowledging women into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding eternally therein, and He will remit their sins from them. With God this is a great triumph.
He will punish the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, and the idolater men and the idolater women, who think evil thoughts about God. Their evil will come back to them, and God was angry with them, and He has cursed them and prepared for them hell. What a miserable destiny!
To God belongs the soldiers of the heavens and the earth. God is Noble, Wise.
We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of good news, and a warner.
So that you may acknowledge God and His messenger, and that you may support Him, honor Him, and glorify Him, morning and evening.*
Those who pledge allegiance to you, are in-fact pledging allegiance to God; God's hand is above their hands. Those of them who violate such a pledge, are violating it only upon themselves. Whosoever fulfills what he has pledged to God, then He will grant him a great reward.
The Arabs who lagged behind will say to you: "We were preoccupied with our money and our family, so ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, "Who then would possess any power for you against God if He wanted harm to afflict you or if He wanted benefit for you?" No, God is fully Aware of everything you do.
Alas, you thought that the messenger and those who acknowledge would not return to their families, and this was deemed pleasant in your hearts, and you thought the worst thoughts; you were a wicked people.
Anyone who does not acknowledge God and His messenger, then We have prepared for the ingrates a hellfire.
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whomever He wills, and punishes whomever He wills. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Those who lagged behind will say, when you venture out to collect the spoils: "Let us follow you!" They want to change God's words. Say, "You will not follow us; this is what God has decreed beforehand." They will then say, "No, you are envious of us." Alas, they rarely understood anything.
Say to those Arabs who lagged behind: "You will be called on to fight a people who are very powerful in warfare, unless they peacefully surrender. Then if you obey, God will grant you a good reward, but if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful retribution."
There is no burden on the blind, nor is there any burden on the cripple, nor is there on the sick any burden. Whosoever obeys God and His messenger, He will admit them into paradises with rivers flowing beneath; and whosoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful retribution.
God is pleased with those who acknowledge who pledged allegiance to you under the tree. He thus knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility upon them, and rewarded them with a near victory.
Abundant spoils that they will take. God is Noble, Wise.
God has promised you abundant spoils that you will take. Thus He has hastened this for you, and He has withheld the people's hands against you; that it may be a sign for those who acknowledge, and that He may guide you to a straight path.
The other group which you could not vanquish, God took care of them. God was capable of all things.
If the ingrates had fought you, they would have turned and ran, then they would have found neither an ally nor a victor.
Such is God's sunna with those who have passed away before, and you will not find any change in God's sunna.
He is the One who withheld their hands against you, and your hands against them in the interior of Mecca, after He had made you victorious over them. God is Seer of what you do.
They are the ones who rejected and barred you from the Restricted Temple, and barred your donations from reaching their destination. There had been acknowledging men and women whom you did not know, and you may have hurt them, and on whose account you would have committed a sin unknowingly. God will admit into His mercy whomever He wills. Had they become separated, We would then have punished those of them who rejected with a painful retribution.
Those who rejected had put in their hearts the rage of the days of ignorance, then God sent down tranquility upon His messenger and those who acknowledge, and directed them to uphold the word of righteousness, and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it. God is fully aware of all things.
God has fulfilled with truth His messenger's vision: "You will enter the Restricted Temple, God willing, secure, with your heads shaven and shortened, having no fear." Thus, He knew what you did not know, and He has coupled with this a near victory.
He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the system of truth, so that it would expose all other systems. God is sufficient as a witness.*
Muhammad, the messenger of God, and those who are with him, are severe against the ingrates, but merciful between themselves. You see them kneeling and prostrating, they seek God's blessings and approval. Their distinction is in their faces, as a result of prostrating. Such is their example in the Torah. Their example in the Injeel is like a plant which shoots out and becomes strong and thick and it stands straight on its trunk, pleasing to the farmers. That He may enrage the ingrates with them. God promises those among them who acknowledge and do good works forgiveness and a great reward.
O you who acknowledge, do not advance yourselves before God and His messenger. Be aware of God. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable.*
O you who acknowledge, do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet, nor shall you speak loudly at him as you would speak loudly to each other, lest your works become nullified while you do not perceive.
Surely, those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of God, they are the ones whose hearts have been tested by God for righteousness. They have deserved forgiveness and a great recompense.
Surely, those who call out to you from behind the private apartments, most of them do not reason.
If they had only been patient till you came out to them, it would have been better for them. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
O you who acknowledge, if a wicked person comes to you with any news, then you shall investigate it. Lest you harm a people out of ignorance, then you will become regretful over what you have done.
Know that among you is the messenger of God. If he were to obey you in many things, you would be in difficulty. But God made you love acknowledgement and He adorned it in your hearts; He made you hate denial, wickedness, and disobedience. These are the rightly guided ones.
Such is the grace from God and a blessing. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.
If two parties of those who acknowledge battle with each other, you shall reconcile them; but if one of them aggresses against the other, then you shall fight the one aggressing until it complies with God's command. Once it complies, then you shall reconcile the two groups with justice, and be equitable; for God loves those who are equitable.
Those who acknowledge are but brothers; so reconcile between your brothers, and be aware of God, that you may receive mercy.
O you who acknowledge, let not a people ridicule other people, for they may be better than them. Nor shall any women ridicule other women, for they may be better than them. Nor shall you mock one another, or call each other names. Evil indeed is the reversion to wickedness after attaining acknowledgement. Anyone who does not repent, then these are the transgressors.
O you who acknowledge, you shall avoid much suspicion, for some suspicion is sinful. Do not spy on one another, nor shall you gossip one another. Would one of you enjoy eating the flesh of his dead brother? You certainly would hate this. You shall observe God. God is Redeemer, Compassionate.
O people, We created you from a male and female, and We made you into nations and tribes, that you may know one another. Surely, the most honorable among you in the sight of God is the most righteous. God is Knowledgeable, Ever-aware.*
The Arabs said, "We acknowledge." Say, "You have not acknowledged; but you should say, 'We have peacefully surrendered', for acknowledgement has not yet entered into your hearts." If you obey God and His messenger, He will not put any of your works to waste. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Those who acknowledge are those who acknowledge God and His messenger, then they do not doubt; they strive with their money and their lives in the cause of God. These are the truthful ones.
Say, "Are you teaching God about your system while God knows everything in the heavens and the earth? God is knowledgeable of all things."
They think they are doing you a favor by having peacefully surrendered. Say, "Do not think you are doing me any favors by your peacefully surrender. For it is God who is doing you a favor that He has guided you to the acknowledgement, if you are honest."
Surely, God knows all the unseen in the heavens and the earth; God is Seer of everything you do.
Q100, and the glorious Quran.*
Are they surprised that a warner has come to them from amongst them, so the ingrates said, "This is something strange!"
"When we are dead and we become dust This is a far return!"
We know which of them has become consumed with the earth; and We have with Us a record which keeps track.
But they denied the truth when it came to them, so they are in a confused state.
Did they not look to the sky above them, how We built it, and adorned it, and how it has no gaps?
The land We extended it, and placed in it stabilizers, and We gave growth in it to every kind of healthy pair.
Something to see and a reminder for every pious servant.
We sent down from the sky blessed water, and We produced with it gardens and grain to be harvested.
The palm trees, emerging with clustering fruit.
A provision for the servants, and We gave life with it to the land which was dead. Such is the resurrection.
Before their denial was that of the people of Noah, and the dwellers of Al-Raas, and Thamud.
And Aad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot.
The people of the forest, and the people of Tubba. All of them rejected the messengers, and thus the promise came to pass.
Did We have any difficulty in making the first creation? No, they are in confusion about the next creation.
We have created the human being and We know what his person whispers to him, and We are closer to him than his jugular vein.
When the two receivers meet on the right and on the left.
He does not utter a word except with having a constant recorder.
The moment of death came in truth: "This is what you have been trying to avoid!"
The horn is blown on the promised day.
Every person is brought, being driven, and with a witness.
"You were heedless of this, so now We have removed your veil, and your sight today is iron/sharp!"
His constant companion said, "Here is one who is a transgressor."
Cast in hell every stubborn ingrate.
Denier of good, transgressor, doubter.
The one who sets up another god beside God. So cast him into the severe retribution.
His constant companion said, "Our Lord, I did not corrupt him, but he was already far astray."
He said, "Do not argue with each other before Me, I have already presented you with My promise."
"The sentence will not be changed with Me, and I do not wrong the servants."
The day We say to hell: "Are you full?", and it says: "Are there any more?"
Paradise is brought near to the righteous, not far off.
This is what you have been promised, for every obedient, steadfast
The one who feared the Gracious while unseen, and came with a repenting heart
Enter it in peace. This is the day of eternal life.
In it they will have what they wish, and We have even more.
How many a generation before them have We destroyed? They were stronger in power, and they had dominated the land. Did they find any sanctuary?
In this is a reminder for whoever has a heart, or cares to listen while he is heedful.
We have created the heavens, the earth and what is between them in six days, and no fatigue touched Us.*
So be patient to what they are saying, and glorify the grace of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting.
From the night glorify Him, and after prostrating.
Listen to the day when the caller will call from a near place.
The day they hear the scream with truth. That is the day of coming out.
We are the Ones who give life and bring death, and to Us is the destiny.
The day when the earth will rapidly crumble away from them; that will be a gathering which is easy for Us.
We are totally aware of what they say, and you are not to be a tyrant over them. So remind with the Quran those who fear My promise.
By the atoms that scatter.*
Carrying a charge.
Flowing smoothly.
Distributing a command.
What you are being promised is true.
The Judgment will come to pass.
By the sky with orbits.
You are in verbal discord.
Misled by it is the deviant.
Woe to the deceitful.
Who are in mischief, unaware.
They ask: "When is the day of Judgment?"
The day they are tested upon the fire.
"Taste this trial of yours; this is what you asked to be hastened."
The righteous are in paradises and springs.
Receiving what their Lord has bestowed to them, for they were before that pious.
They used to rarely sleep the whole night.
Before dawn, they would seek forgiveness.
An in their money was a portion for the beggar and the needy.
In the earth are signs for those who reason.
Within yourselves; do you not see?
In the heaven is your provision, and what you are promised.
By the Lord of the heaven and the earth, this is truth just as the fact that you speak.
Has the story of Abraham's noble guests come to you?
When they entered upon him, they said, "Peace." He said, "Peace to a people unknown!"
Then he went to his family and brought a fat roasted calf.
He offered it to them, he said, "Do you not eat?"
He then became fearful of them. They said, "Do not fear," and they gave him good news of a knowledgeable son.
His wife then approached in amazement. She slapped upon her face, and said, "I am a sterile old woman!"
They said, "It was such that your Lord has said. He is the Wise, the Knowledgeable."
He said, "What is your undertaking, O messengers?"
They said, "We have been sent to a criminal people."
"To send down upon them rocks of clay."
"Prepared by your Lord for the transgressors."
We then vacated from it all those who acknowledged.
But We only found in it one house of those who had peacefully surrendered.
We have left in it a sign for those who fear the painful retribution.
Also Moses, for We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority.
But he turned away, in arrogance, and he said, "A magician, or crazy."
So We took him and his troops; We cast them into the sea, and he was to blame.
Also Aad, for We sent upon them the hurricane wind.
Anything that it came upon was utterly destroyed.
Also Thamud, for it was said to them: "Enjoy for a while."
But they rebelled against the command of their Lord. So the lightning struck them while they were looking.
They were unable to rise up, nor could they win.
The people of Noah before; they were a wicked people.
We constructed the universe with might, and We are expanding it.*
The earth We furnished; We are fine Providers.
From everything We created a pair, perhaps you may remember.
So turn towards God. I am to you from Him a clear warner.
Do not make any other god with God. I am to you from Him a clear warner.
Likewise, when a messenger went to those before them, they said, "A magician, or crazy."
Have they passed down this saying to each other? Indeed, they are a wicked people.
So turn away from them; you will not be blamed.*
Remind, for the reminder benefits those who acknowledge.
I did not create the Jinn and the humans except to serve Me.*
I need no provisions from them, nor do I need them to give food.
God is the Provider, the One with Power, the Supreme.
The transgressors will have the same fate as their previous friends; so let them not be hasty.
So woe to those who rejected from the day that is waiting for them.
By the mount,
A recorded book.
In paper published.
The frequented/built sanctuary.
The ceiling which is elevated.
The sea that is set aflame.
Your Lord's retribution is unavoidable.
Nothing can stop it.
The day when the sky will violently thunder.
The mountains will be wiped out.
Woes on that day to the deniers.
Who are in their recklessness, playing.
The day they will be called into hell, forcibly:
"This is the fire which you used to deny!"
"Is this magic, or do you not see?"
"Enter it, whether you are patient or impatient, it will be the same for you. You are only being requited for what you used to do."
The righteous are in paradises and bliss.
Delighted by what their Lord has granted them; and their Lord has spared them the retribution of hell.
Eat and drink happily because of what you used to do.
They recline on arranged furnishings, and We coupled them with wonderful companions.*
Those who acknowledged, and their progeny also followed them in acknowledgement; We will have their progeny join them. We never fail to reward them for any work. Every person is paid for what he did.
We will supply them with fruit and meat such as they desire.
They will exchange one with another a cup in which there is no harm, nor regret.
Around them will be children like protected pearls.
They came to one another asking.
They said, "We used to be compassionate among our people."
"God thus blessed us, and has spared us the agony of the fiery winds."
"We used to implore Him before; He is the Kind, the Compassionate."
Therefore, you shall remind. For by the grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer, nor mad.
Or do they say, "He is a poet; so let us just wait until a disaster befalls him."
Say, "Continue waiting; for I will wait along with you."
Or do their dreams dictate this to them, or are they a transgressing people?
Or do they say, "He made it all up"? No, they simply do not acknowledge.
Let them produce a hadith like this, if they are truthful.*
Or were they created from nothing? Or was it they who created?
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? No, they do not reason.
Or do they possess the treasures of your Lord? Are they in control?
Or do they have a stairway that enables them to listen? Then let their Hearers show their proof.
Or to Him belong the daughters, and to you belong the sons?
Or do you ask them for a wage, thus they are burdened by the fine?
Or do they know the future, thus they have it recorded?
Or do they intend to scheme? Indeed, it is the ingrates who are schemed against.
Or do they have another god besides God? God be glorified above what they set up.
If they see an object falling from the sky, they will say, "Piled clouds!"
So disregard them until they meet the day in which they are struck.
The day when their schemes will not protect them, nor will they be helped.
For those who transgressed will be retribution beyond this, but most of them do not know.
You shall be patient for the judgment of your Lord, for you are in Our sights, and glorify the praise of your Lord when you get up.
Also during the night glorify Him, and at the setting of the stars.
As the star collapsed.*
Your friend was not astray, nor was he deceived.*
Nor does he speak from personal desire.*
It is a divine inspiration.
He has been taught by One mighty in power.
Possessor of ultimate wisdom; he became stable.
While he was at the highest horizon.
Then he drew nearer by moving down.
Until he became as near as two bow-lengths or nearer.
He then conveyed the inspiration to His servant what was to be revealed.
The heart did not invent what it saw.
Do you doubt him in what he saw?
Indeed, he saw him in another descent.
At the ultimate point.
Near is the eternal Paradise.
The whole place was overwhelmed.
The eyes did not waver, nor go blind.
He has seen from the great signs of his Lord.
Have you considered Allaat and Al-Uzzah?*
And Manaat, the third one?
Do you have the males, while He has the females?
What a strange distribution!
These are but names/attributes that you made up, you and your forefathers. God never authorized such. They only follow conjecture, and wishful thinking, while the guidance has come to them from their Lord.
Or shall the human being have what he wishes?
To God belongs the Hereafter, and the world.
There are many angels in heaven, who have no power to intercede, except after God gives permission for whom He wishes and is satisfied with him.*
Those who reject the Hereafter have given the angels feminine names.
While they had no knowledge about this; they only followed conjecture. Conjecture is no substitute for the truth.
So disregard he who turns away from Our reminder, and only desires this worldly life.
This is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord is fully aware of those who strayed away from His path, and He is fully aware of those who are guided.
To God belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. He will requite those who commit evil for their works, and will reward the righteous for their righteousness.
They avoid major sins and lewdness, except for minor offences. Your Lord is with vast forgiveness. He has been fully aware of you since He initiated you from the earth, and while you were fetuses in your mothers' wombs. Therefore, do not acclaim yourselves; He is fully aware of the righteous.
Have you noted the one who turned away?
He gave very little, and then he stopped.
Did he possess knowledge of the future? Could he see it?
Or was he not informed of the teachings in the book of Moses?
Of Abraham who fulfilled?
None can carry the burdens of another.
The human being will have what he sought.
His works will be shown.
Then he will be paid fully for such works.
To your Lord is the final destiny.
He is the One who makes laughter and tears.*
He is the One who takes life and gives it.
He is the One who created the pair, male and female.*
From a seed that is put forth.
He will effect the recreation.
He is the One who makes you rich or poor.
He is the Lord of Sirius.
He is the One who destroyed Aad the first.
Of Thamud He left nothing.
The people of Noah before that; they were evil transgressors.
The evil communities were the lowliest.
Consequently, they utterly vanished.
So which of your Lord's marvels can you deny?
This is a warning like the older ones.
The final judgment draws near.
None beside God can relieve it.
Are you surprised by this narration?
You are laughing, instead of crying?
You are insisting on your ways?
You shall prostrate to God, and serve.
The moment drew near, and the moon was split.*
If they see a sign, they turn away and say, "Continuous magic!"
They rejected, and followed their desires, and every old tradition.*
While the news had come to them in which there was sufficient warning.
A perfect wisdom; but the warnings are of no benefit.
So turn away from them; the day will come when the caller will announce a terrible disaster.
With their eyes humiliated, they come out of the graves like scattered cicadas.*
Hastening towards the caller, the ingrates will say, "This is a difficult day."
The people of Noah rejected before them. They rejected Our servant and said, "He is crazy!" and he was oppressed.
So he called on his Lord: "I am beaten, so grant me victory."
So We opened the gates of the sky with pouring water.
We caused springs to gush out of the earth. Thus the waters met to a command which had been measured.
We carried him on a craft made of slabs and mortar.*
It ran under Our watchful eyes; a reward for one who was rejected.
We have left it as a sign. Do any of you wish to learn?
So how was My retribution after the warnings!
We made the Quran easy to learn. Do any of you wish to learn?*
Aad rejected. So how was My retribution after the warnings!
We sent upon them a violent wind, on a day of continuous misery.
It uprooted the people as if they were decayed palm tree trunks.
So how was My retribution after the warnings!
We made the Quran easy to learn. Do any of you wish to learn?
Thamud rejected the warnings.
They said, "Shall we follow one of us; a human being? We will then go astray, and be in hell."
"Has the message come down to him, instead of us? He is an evil liar."
They will find out tomorrow who the evil liar is.
We are sending the camel as a test for them. So observe them and be patient.
Inform them that the water shall be divided between them; each shall be allowed to drink in the specified time.
But they called on their friend, and he was paid to slaughter.
So how was My retribution after the warnings!
We sent upon them one scream, whereupon they became like harvested hay.
We made the Quran easy to learn. Do any of you wish to learn?
The people of Lot rejected the warners.
We sent upon them projectiles. Except for the family of Lot, We saved them at dawn.
A blessing from Us; it is thus that We reward those who are appreciative.
He warned them about Our punishment, but they ridiculed the warnings.
They sought to remove him from his guests; so We diverted their eyes. "Taste My retribution; you have been warned."
In the early morning, a devastating retribution struck them.
"Taste My retribution; you have been warned."
We made the Quran easy to learn. Do any of you wish to learn?
The warnings had come to the people of Pharaoh.
They rejected all Our signs. So We took them, the taking of the Noble, the Able.
Are your ingrates better than those? Or have you been absolved by the book?
Or do they say, "We are a large group and we will win."
The large group will be defeated; they will turn around and flee.
The moment is their appointed time, and the moment is far worse and more painful.
The criminals are in error and will burn.
The day when they will be dragged upon their faces into the fire: "Taste the agony of Saqar!"*
Everything We have created in measure.
Our commands are done at once with the blink of an eye.
We have destroyed your counterparts. Do any of you wish to learn?
Everything they did is in the records.
Everything, small or large, is written down.
The righteous will be in paradises and rivers.
In a position of honor, at an Omnipotent King.
The Gracious:
Has taught the Quran.
He created the human being,
Taught him how to distinguish.
The sun and the moon are perfectly calculated.*
The stars and the trees submit.
He raised the sky and He established the balance.
Do not transgress in the balance.
Observe the weight with equity, and do not fall short in the balance.
The earth He has made for all creatures.
In it are fruits, and date palms with their hanging fruit.*
Grains and the spices.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
He created the human from clay, like pottery.
The Jinn He created from a smokeless fire.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
The Lord of the two easts and the two wests.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
He merges the two seas where they meet.
A barrier is placed between them, which they do not cross.*
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Out of both of them come pearls and coral.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
To Him are the ships that roam the sea like flags.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Everyone upon it will fade away.
The presence of your Lord will remain, the One with Majesty and Honor.*
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Those in the heavens and earth ask Him, everyday He is in some matter.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
We will call you to account, both of you beings.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
O tribes of Jinn and humans, if you can penetrate the diameters of the heavens and the earth, then go ahead and penetrate. You will not penetrate without authority.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
He sends against both of you projectiles of fire and copper; so you will not succeed.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Then, when the universe is torn, and turns like a rose-colored paint.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
On that day, no more questioning is asked of human or Jinn as to his sins.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
The guilty will be recognized by their features; they will be taken by the forelocks and the feet.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
This is hell that the criminals used to deny.
They will move between it and a boiling liquid.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
For he who reverenced the majesty of his Lord, will be two paradises.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Full of provisions.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them are two springs, flowing.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them will be of every fruit, in pairs.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
While reclining upon furnishings lined with satin, the fruits of the two paradises are within reach.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them are the best of the fruits hanging low, untouched before by any human or Jinn.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
They look like rubies and coral.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Is there any reward for goodness except goodness?
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Besides these will be two other paradises.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Dark green in color.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them, two springs which gush forth.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them are fruits, date palms, and pomegranate.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
In them is what is good and beautiful.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Companions, inside grand pavilions.*
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
No human has ever touched them, nor Jinn.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Reclining on green carpets, in beautiful surroundings.
So which of your Lord's favors will you deny?
Glorified be the name of your Lord, Possessor of Majesty and Honor.
When the inevitable comes to pass.
Nothing can stop it from happening.
Abasing, exalting.
When the earth will be shaken a terrible shake.
The mountains will be wiped out.
So that they become only scattered dust.
You will be in three groupings.
So those on the right; who will be from those on the right?
Those on the left; who will be from those on the left?
Those foremost; who will be from those foremost?
They will be the ones who are brought near.
In the paradises of bliss.
Many from the first generations.*
A few from the later generations.
Upon luxurious furnishings.
Residing in them, neighboring each other.
Moving amongst them will be immortal children.
With cups and pitchers, drinks which are pure.
They do not run out, nor do they get bored.
Fruits of their choice.
Meat of birds that they desire.*
Wonderful companions,
Like pearls which are sheltered.
A reward for their works.
They never hear any nonsense therein, nor sinful utterances.
Only the utterances of: "Peace. Peace."
Those on the right; who will be with those on the right?
In lush orchards.
Fruit-trees which are ripe.
Extended shade.
Flowing water.
Many fruits.
Neither ending; nor forbidden.
Raised furnishings.
We have produced them in a special way.
Made them young.
A perfect match.
For those on the right side.
Many from the early generations.
Many from the later generations.
Those on the left, who will be from those on the left?
In fierce hot winds and boiling water.
A shade that is unpleasant.
Neither cool, nor helpful.
They used to be indulged in luxury before this.
They persisted in the great blasphemy.
They used to say, "After we die and turn to dust and bones, shall we then get resurrected?"
"As well as our forefathers?"
Say, "The people of old and the later generations,"
"Will be summoned to a meeting on a predetermined day."
"Then you, O rejecting strayers,"
"Will eat from the tree of Bitterness,"
"Filling your bellies therewith,"
"Then drinking on top of it boiling water,"
"So you will drink like thirsty camels!"
Such is their share on the day of Judgment.
We have created you, if you could only acknowledge!
Have you noted the semen that you produce?
Did you create it, or were We the Ones who created it?
We have predetermined death for you. Nothing can stop Us,
From transforming your forms, and establishing you in what you do not know.
You have come to know about the first creation. If only you would remember.
Have you noted the crops you reap?
Did you grow them, or were We the Ones who grew them?
If We wished, We could turn them into hay. Then you would be left in wonderment:
"We are lost."
"No, we are deprived!"
Have you noted the water you drink?
Did you send it down from the clouds, or was it We who sent it down?
If We wished, We could make it salty. If only you would give thanks.
Have you noted the fire you kindle?
Did you initiate its tree, or was it We who initiated it?
We rendered it a reminder, and a useful tool for the users.
You shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great.
I do swear by the positions of the stars.*
This is an oath, if you only knew, that is great.
It is an honorable Quran.*
In a protected record.
None can grasp it except those pure.
A revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
Are you disregarding this hadith?*
You made your denial your livelihood?
So when the time comes and it reaches your throat.
At that moment you look around.
We are closer to it than you are, but you do not see.
If it is true that you do not owe any account.
Then return it, if you are truthful?
So, if he is one of those who are made near.
Then joy, and rose buds, and paradises of bliss.
If he is one of the people of the right.
Then: "Peace" from the people of the right.
But if he is one of the deniers, the strayers.
Then an abode of boiling water.
A burning in hell.
This is the absolute truth.
You shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great.*
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise.
To Him is the kingship of the heavens and the earth. He brings life and death. He is capable of all things.
He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Innermost. He is fully aware of all things.
He is the One who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and then He settled over the dominion. He knows everything that enters into the land, everything that comes out of it, everything that comes down from the sky, and everything that climbs into it. He is with you wherever you may be. God is Seer of everything you do.*
To Him is the kingship of the heavens and the earth, and to God all matters are returned.
He merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night. He is fully aware of what is inside the chests.
Acknowledge God and His messenger, and spend from what He has made you successors to. Those among you who acknowledge and spend have deserved a great recompense.
Why should you not acknowledge God when the messenger is inviting you to acknowledge your Lord? He has already taken a pledge from you, if you are those who acknowledge.
He is the One who sends down to His servant clear signs, to bring you out of the darkness into the light. God is Kind towards you, Compassionate.
Why do you not spend in the cause of God, when God possesses all wealth in the heavens and the earth? Not equal among you are those who spent before the victory and fought. They attained a greater rank than those who spent after the victory and fought. For each, God promises goodness. God is Ever-aware in everything you do.
Who will lend God a loan of goodness, to have it multiplied for him manifold, and he will have a generous recompense?
The day will come when you see the acknowledging men and the acknowledging women with their light radiating around them and to their right. "Good news is yours today, you will have paradises with flowing rivers, abiding therein. This is the great triumph!"
On that day, the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women will say to those who acknowledged: "Wait for us! Let us absorb some of your light." It will be said, "Go back behind you, and seek light." So a barrier will be set up between them, whose gate separates compassion on the inner side, from retribution on the outer side.
They will call upon them: "Were we not with you?" They will reply: "Yes, but you led yourselves into temptation, and you hesitated, and doubted, and became misled by wishful thinking, until God's judgment came. You were diverted from God by arrogance."
"This day, no ransom can be taken from you, nor from those who rejected. Your abode is the fire, it is your patron; what a miserable abode."
Has not the time come for those who acknowledged to open up their hearts for the remembrance of God, and the truth that is revealed herein? They should not be like those who were given the book before, and the waiting became long for them, so their hearts became hardened, and many of them were wicked.
Know that God revives the land after it had died. We have made clear to you the signs, perhaps you may understand.
Surely, the charitable men and charitable women, who have loaned God a loan of goodness, He will multiply their reward, and they will have a generous recompense.
Those who acknowledged God and His messengers are the truthful ones. The martyrs at their Lord will have their reward and their light. As for those who rejected and rejected Our signs, they are the dwellers of hell.
Know that this worldly life is no more than play and amusement, and boasting among you, and an increase in wealth and children. It is like plants that are supplied by an abundant rain, which appear pleasing to those who do not appreciate. But then they dry up and turn yellow, and become useless hay. In the Hereafter there is severe retribution, and forgiveness from God and approval. This worldly life is no more than a deceiving enjoyment.
You shall race towards forgiveness from your Lord, and a Paradise whose width is as the width of the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who acknowledged God and His messengers. Such is God's grace that He bestows upon whomever He wills. God is the Possessor of Infinite Grace.
No misfortune can happen on earth, or in yourselves, except it is decreed in a record, before We bring it about. This is easy for God to do.*
In order that you do not despair over anything that has passed you by, nor be exultant of anything He has bestowed upon you. God does not like those who are boastful, proud.
They are stingy, and order the people to be stingy. For anyone who turns away, then know that God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
We have sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and We sent down with them the book and the balance, that the people may uphold justice. We sent down the iron, wherein there is great strength, and many benefits for the people. So that God would distinguish those who would support Him and His messengers on acknowledgement. God is Powerful, Noble.*
We had sent Noah and Abraham, and We placed in their progeny the prophethood and the book. Some of them were guided, while many were wicked.
Then We sent in their tracks Our messengers. We sent Jesus the son of Mary, and We gave him the Injeel, and We ordained in the hearts of his followers kindness and compassion. But they invented Monasticism which We never decreed for them. They wanted to please God, but they did not observe it the way it should have been observed. Consequently, We gave those who acknowledged among them their recompense, while many of them were wicked.*
O you who acknowledge, you shall reverence God and acknowledge His messenger. He will then grant you double the reward from His mercy, and He will make for you a light by which you shall walk, and He will forgive you. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
So that the followers of the book should know that they have no power over God's grace, and that all grace is in God's hand. He bestows it upon whoever/whomever He wills. God is Possessor of Infinite Grace.
God has heard the woman who argues with you regarding her husband, and she complains to God. God hears the argument between you. God is Hearer, Seer.*
Those among you who estrange their wives by saying to them: "You are as my mother." They can never be as their mothers, for their mothers are the women who gave birth to them. Indeed, they are uttering what is strange and a falsehood. God is Pardoner, Forgiver.
Those who had estranged their wives in this manner, then they again repeat it, they shall free a slave before they have sexual contact between them. This is to enlighten you. God is well aware of everything you do.*
If he cannot find anyone, then he shall fast two consecutive months before any sexual contact between them. If he cannot, then he shall feed sixty poor people. That is so you would acknowledge God and His messenger. These are the limits set by God. Those who do not appreciate have incurred a painful retribution.*
Those who oppose God and His messenger will be disgraced, like their previous counterparts were disgraced. We have sent down clear proofs, and the ingrates have incurred a shameful retribution.
The day when God resurrects them all, then He informs them of what they had done. God has recorded it, while they have forgotten it. God witnesses all things.
Do you not realize that God knows everything in the heavens and everything on earth? No three people can meet secretly without Him being their fourth, nor five without Him being the sixth, nor less than that, nor more, without Him being there with them wherever they may be. Then, on the day of resurrection, He will inform them of everything they had done. God is fully aware of all things.
Have you noted those who were forbidden from holding meetings in secret, but then insist on it? They meet secretly to commit sin, transgression, and disobedience of the messenger. When they come to you, they greet you with a greeting other than what God greets you with. They say inside themselves: "Why does God not punish us for our utterances?" Hell will be sufficient for them, wherein they burn; what a miserable destiny.
O you who acknowledge, if you must meet secretly, then you shall not meet to commit sin, transgression, and to disobey the messenger. You shall meet to work righteousness and piety. Be aware of God, before whom you will be summoned.
Secret meetings are from the devil, to cause grief to those who acknowledged. However, he cannot harm them except by God's will. In God those who acknowledge shall put their trust.
O you who acknowledge, if you are told to make room in the councils, then you shall make room. God will then make room for you. If you are asked to step down, then step down. God will raise those among you who acknowledge, and those who acquire knowledge to higher ranks. God is fully aware of everything you do.
O you who acknowledge, if you wish to hold a private meeting with the messenger, you shall offer a charity before you do so. This is better for you, and purer. If you cannot afford it, then God is Forgiver, Compassionate.*
Are you reluctant to offer a charity before such a meeting? If you do not do it; and God had forgiven you; then you shall hold the contact prayer, contribute towards betterment, and obey God and His messenger. God is fully Aware of everything you do.
Have you noted those who befriended people with whom God is angry? They are now neither from you nor from them. They deliberately swear to lies while they know!
God has prepared for them a severe retribution. Miserable indeed is what they used to do.
They used their treaties/oaths as a means of repelling from the path of God. Consequently, they have incurred a shameful retribution.
Neither their money, nor their children will help them against God in the least. They have incurred the hellfire, in it they will abide.
The day will come when God resurrects them all. Then they will swear to Him, just as they swear to you, thinking that they actually are right! Indeed, they are the liars.
The devil has overtaken them, and has caused them to forget the remembrance of God. These are the party of the devil. Absolutely, the party of the devil are the losers.
Surely, those who oppose God and His messenger, they will be with the lowliest.
God has decreed: "I and My messengers will be the victors." God is Powerful, Noble.
You will not find any people who acknowledge God and the Last day befriending those who oppose God and His messenger, even if they were their parents, or their children, or their siblings, or their tribe. For these, He decrees trust into their hearts, and supports them with a Spirit from Him, and He admits them into paradises with rivers flowing beneath, wherein they will abide. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. These are the party of God. Most assuredly, the party of God are the winners.
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Noble, the Wise.
He is the One who drove out those who rejected among the people of the book from their homes at the very first mass exile. You never thought that they would leave, and they thought that their fortresses would protect them from God. But then God came to them from where they did not expect, and He cast fear into their hearts. They destroyed their homes with their own hands and the hands of those who acknowledge. So take a lesson, O you who possess vision.*
Had God not decreed to banish them, He would have punished them in this life. In the Hereafter they will face the retribution of the fire.
This is because they challenged God and His messenger. Whosoever challenges God, then God is severe in punishment.
Whether you cut down a tree or left it standing on its root, it was by God's leave. He will surely humiliate the wicked.
What God provided to His messenger, without you having to battle for it on horses or on foot, was because God sends His messengers against whomever He wills. God is capable of all things.
Whatever God provided to His messenger from the people of the townships, then it shall be to God and His messenger; for the relatives, the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer. Thus, it will not remain monopolized by the rich among you. You may take what the messenger gives you, but do not take what he withholds you from taking. Be aware of God, for God is mighty in retribution.*
For the immigrants who are poor and were driven out of their homes and deprived of their properties, they sought God's grace and pleasure, and they supported God and His messenger. They are the truthful ones.
Those who provided them with shelter, and were those who acknowledge before them; they love those who immigrated to them, and they find no hesitation in their hearts in helping them, and they readily give them priority over themselves, even when they themselves need what they give away. Indeed, those who overcome their hedonism are the successful ones.
Those who came after them saying: "Our Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us to the acknowledgement, and do not place in our hearts any animosity towards those who acknowledged. Our Lord, You are Kind, Compassionate."
Have you noted those who are hypocrites, they say to their companions in denial among the people of the book: "If you are driven out we will go out with you, and we will never obey anyone who opposes you. If anyone fights you, we will support you." God bears witness that they are liars.
If they were driven out, they would not have gone out with them, and if anyone fought them, they would not have supported them. Even if they supported them, they would have turned around and fled. They could never win.
Indeed, you strike more trepidation in their hearts than God. This is because they are people who do not reason.
They will not fight you all unless they are in fortified towns, or from behind walls. Their might appears formidable among themselves. You would think that they are united, but their hearts are divided. This is because they are people who do not understand.
Like the example of those who preceded them. They suffered the consequences of their decisions. They have incurred a painful retribution.
Like the example of the devil, when he says to the human being: "Reject," then as soon as he rejects, he says: "I disown you. I fear God, the Lord of the worlds."
So the destiny for both of them is the fire, abiding therein. Such is the recompense for the wicked.
O you who acknowledge, be aware of God, and let every person examine what it has put forth for tomorrow. Be aware of God; God is fully aware of everything you do.
Do not be like those who forgot God, so He made them forget themselves. These are the wicked.
Not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of Paradise; the dwellers of Paradise are the winners.
Had We sent down this Quran to a mountain, you would have seen it trembling, crumbling, out of reverence for God. Such are the examples We cite for the people, that they may reflect.
He is God; there is no other god beside Him. Knower of all secrets and declarations. He is the Gracious, the Compassionate.*
He is God; there is no other god beside Him. The King, the Holy, the Peace, the Trusted, the Supreme, the Noble, the Powerful, the Dignified. God be glorified; far above what they set up.
He is God; the Creator, the Initiator, the Designer. To Him belong the most beautiful names. Glorifying Him is everything in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise.
O you who acknowledge, do not take My enemy and your enemy as allies, you extend love to them, even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you. They drive you and the messenger out, simply because you acknowledge God, your Lord. If you are mobilizing to strive in My cause, seeking My blessings, then how can you secretly love them? I am fully aware of everything you conceal and what you declare. Whosoever of you does this, then he has gone astray from the right path.
If they encounter you, they treat you as enemies, and they extend their hands and tongues against you to hurt you. They desire you to reject.
Neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you; on the day of resurrection He will separate between you. God is Seer of everything you do.
There has been a good example set for you by Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people: "We are innocent from you and what you serve besides God. We have rejected you, and it appears that there shall be animosity and hatred between us and you until you acknowledge God alone." Except for the saying of Abraham to his father: "I will ask forgiveness for you, but I do not possess any power to protect you from God." "Our Lord, we have put our trust in You, and we turn to You, and to You is the final destiny."*
"Our Lord, do not let us become a test for those who rejected, and forgive us. Our Lord, You are the Noble, the Wise."
Certainly, a good example has been set by them for those who seek God and the Last day. Whosoever turns away, then God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
Perhaps God will grant compassion between you and those you consider enemies; and God is Omnipotent. God is Forgiving, Compassionate.*
God does not forbid you from those who have not fought you because of your system, nor drove you out of your homes, that you deal kindly and equitably with them. For God loves the equitable.
But God does forbid you regarding those who fought you because of your system, and drove you out of your homes, and helped to drive you out. You shall not ally with them. Those who ally with them, then such are the transgressors.
O you who acknowledge, if the acknowledging women come emigrating to you, then you shall test them. God is fully aware of their acknowledgement. Thus, if you establish that they are those who acknowledge, then you shall not return them to those who do not appreciate. They are no longer lawful for them, nor are those who do not appreciate lawful for them. Return the dowries that were paid. There is no sin upon you to marry them, if you have paid their dowries to them. Do not keep the wives who do not acknowledge, and ask back what dowries you paid. Let them ask back what dowries they had paid. Such is God's judgment; He judges between you. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.*
If any of your wives have gone over to the camp of those who do not appreciate, and you are granted victory over them, then you shall compensate those whose wives have gone over, to the equivalent of what dowry they spent. Be aware of God, whom you acknowledge.
O you prophet, if the acknowledging women come to make allegiance to you that they will not set up anything beside God, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their born children, nor fabricate any falsehood, nor disobey you in any matter which is righteous, then you shall accept their allegiance, and ask God to forgive them. God is Forgiver, Compassionate.*
O you who acknowledge, do not ally a people with whom God is angry; for they have given up regarding the Hereafter, just like the ingrates have given up on the people who are already in the graves.
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise.
O you who acknowledge, why do you say what you do not do?
It is most despicable with God that you would say what you do not do.
God loves those who fight in His cause as one column; they are like bricks in a wall.
When Moses said to his people: "O my people, why do you harm me, while you know that I am God's messenger to you?" But when they deviated, God diverted their hearts. God does not guide the wicked people.
When Jesus, son of Mary, said, "O children of Israel, I am God's messenger to you, authenticating what is present with me of the Torah and bringing good news of a messenger to come after me whose name will be most acclaimed.'" But when he showed them the clear proofs, they said, This is clearly magic.'*
Who is more evil than one who fabricates lies about God, while he is being invited to peacefully surrender? God does not guide the evil people.
They wish to put out God's light with their mouths. But God will continue with His light, even if the ingrates dislike it.
He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the system of truth, so that it will manifest it above all other systems, even if those who set up partners dislike it.
"O you who acknowledge, shall I lead you to a trade that will save you from painful retribution?"
"That you acknowledge God and His messenger and strive in the cause of God with your money and your lives. This is best for you, if only you knew."
He will then forgive your sins, and admit you into paradises with rivers flowing beneath, and beautiful mansions in the gardens of Eden. This is the greatest triumph.
Also you will receive what you love: a triumph from God and a victory that is close at hand. Give good news to those who acknowledge.
O you who acknowledge, be God's supporters, as Jesus the son of Mary said to his disciples: "Who are my supporters towards God?" The disciples said, "We are God's supporters." Thus, a group from the Children of Israel acknowledged, and another group rejected. So, We supported those who acknowledged against their enemy, and they were successful.
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth; the King, the Holy, the Noble, the Wise.
He is the One who sent to the Gentiles a messenger from among themselves, to recite to them His signs, to purify them, to teach them the book and the wisdom. Before this, they were clearly astray.
To other generations subsequent to them. He is the Noble, the Wise.
Such is God's grace, which He bestows upon whoever/whomever He wills. God is Possessor of Infinite Grace.
The example of those who were given the Torah, but then failed to uphold it, is like the donkey that is carrying a cargo of book. Miserable indeed is the example of people who denied God's signs. God does not guide the wicked people.
Say, "O you who are Jewish, if you claim that you are God's chosen, to the exclusion of all other people, then you should long for death if you are truthful!"
But they will never long for it, because of what their hands have brought forth. God is fully aware of the wicked.
Say, "The death that you are fleeing from, it will come to find you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of all secrets and declarations, then He will inform you of everything you had done."
O you who acknowledge, if the contact prayer is called to on the day of assembly, then you shall hasten towards the remembrance of God, and cease all selling. This is better for you, if you only knew.*
Then, once the contact prayer is complete, you shall disperse through the land and seek God's provisions, and remember God frequently, so that you may succeed.
If they come across any trade, or some entertainment, they rush to it and leave you standing, say, "What God possesses is far better than entertainment or trade. God is the best Provider."
When the hypocrites come to you they say, "We bear witness that you are the messenger of God." God knows that you are His messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are liars.*
They have chosen their oath as a deceit, thus they repel from the path of God. Miserable indeed is what they do.
That is because they acknowledged, then rejected. Hence, their hearts are sealed; they do not understand.
When you see them, you are impressed by their physical stature; and when they speak, you listen to their eloquence. They are like blocks of wood propped up. They think that every call is intended for them. These are the enemies, so beware of them. May God condemn them; they have deviated.
If they are told: "Come and let the messenger of God ask for your forgiveness," they turn aside their heads, and you see them walking away in pride.
It is the same for them, whether you ask for their forgiveness, or do not ask for their forgiveness; God will not forgive them. For God does not guide the wicked people.*
They are the ones who say, "Do not spend on those who are with the messenger of God, unless they abandon him!" To God belongs the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not reason.
They say, "When we go back to the city, the noble therein will evict the lowly." But all nobility belongs to God and His messenger, and those who acknowledge. However, the hypocrites do not know.
O you who acknowledge, do not be distracted by your money and your children from the remembrance of God. Those who do this, will be the losers.
Give from what We have provided to you, before death comes to one of you, then he says: "My Lord, if only You could delay this for a short while, I would then be charitable and join the righteous!"
God will not delay any person if its time has come. God is Ever-aware of all that you do.
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. To Him is all kingships, and to Him is all praise, and He is capable of all things.
He is the One who created you, then among you there is the ingrate, and among you is the acknowledger. God is Seer over what you do.
He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He designed you and made your design the best, and to Him is the final destiny.
He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you declare. God is aware of what is inside the chests.
Did the news not come to you of those who had rejected before? They had tasted the consequences of their decision and they incurred a painful retribution.
That was because their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they said, "Shall humans guide us?" So they rejected and turned away. Yet, God had no need. God is Rich, Praiseworthy.
Those who reject claim that they will not be resurrected. Say, "Yes, by my Lord, you will be resurrected, then you will be informed of everything you have done, and this is easy for God to do."
Therefore, you shall acknowledge God and His messenger, and the light that We have sent down. God is Ever-aware of all that you do.
The day when He will gather you, the day of Gathering. That is the day of mutual blaming. Whosoever acknowledges God and does good works, He will remit his sins, and will admit him into paradises with rivers flowing beneath to abide therein forever. Such is the greatest triumph.
As for those who reject and deny Our signs, they are the dwellers of the fire; they will abide therein. What a miserable destiny!
No misfortune strikes except with God's leave. Whosoever acknowledges God, He will guide his heart. God is fully aware of all things.
Obey God and obey the messenger. If you turn away, then it is only required of Our messenger to deliver clearly.
God, there is no god besides Him. In God those who acknowledge shall put their trust.
O you who acknowledge, from among your spouses and your children are enemies to you; so beware of them. If you pardon, and overlook, and forgive, then God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
Your money and children are a test, and with God is a great recompense.
Therefore, be aware of God as much as you can, and listen, and obey, and give for charity for your own good. Whosoever is protected from his own hedonistic desires, then these are the successful ones.
If you lend God a loan of righteousness, He will multiply it for you many fold, and forgive you. God is Appreciative, Compassionate.
The Knower of all secrets and declarations; the Noble, the Wise.
O you prophet, if any of you have divorced the women, then they should be divorced while ensuring that their required interim is fulfilled, and keep count of the interim. You shall reverence God your Lord, and do not evict the women from their homes, nor should they leave, unless they have committed a proven adultery. These are God's limits. Anyone who transgresses God's limits has wronged his person. You never know; perhaps God will make something come out of this.*
Then, once the interim is fulfilled, either you remain together equitably, or part ways equitably and have it witnessed by two just people from among you; and give the testimony for God. This is to enlighten those who acknowledge God and the Last day. Whosoever reverences God, He will create a solution for him.
He will provide for him whence he never expected. Anyone who puts his trust in God, then He suffices him. God's commands will be done. God has decreed for everything its fate.
As for the women who have reached menopause, if you have any doubts, their interim shall be three months. As for those whose menstruation has ceased, and those who are already pregnant, their interim is until they give birth. Anyone who reverences God, He makes his matters easy for him.
This is God's command that He sends down to you. Anyone who is aware of God, He will remit his sins, and will improve his reward.
You shall let them reside in the home you were in when you were together, and do not coerce them to make them leave. If they are pregnant, you shall spend on them until they give birth. Then, if they nurse the infant for you, you shall pay them their due for such. You shall maintain the amicable relations between you. If you disagree, then another woman may nurse the child.
The rich shall provide support in accordance with his means, and the poor shall provide according to the means that God bestowed upon him. God does not burden any person more than He has given it. God will provide ease after difficulty.
Many a community rebelled against the commands of its Lord and His messengers. Thus, We called them to account, and requited them a terrible requital.
They tasted the result of their actions, and the consequence of their actions was a total loss.
God has prepared for them a severe retribution. Therefore, O the intelligent people who have acknowledged, you shall be aware of God. God has sent down to you a remembrance.*
A messenger who recites to you God's signs, which are clear, to lead those who acknowledge and work righteousness out of the darkness into the light. Anyone who acknowledges God and does good works, He will admit him into paradises with rivers flowing beneath; they abide therein forever. God has granted for him and excellent reward.
God who created seven heavens and the same number of earths. His command descends between them, that you may know that God is capable of all things, and that God has encompassed all things with His knowledge.*
O you prophet, why do you prohibit what God has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives? God is Forgiver, Compassionate.
God has already given the law, regarding the cancellation of oaths. God is your Lord, and He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise.*
When the prophet disclosed a hadith to some of his wives, then one of them spread it, and God revealed it to him, he recognized part of it and denied part. So when he informed her, she said, "Who informed you of this?" He said, "I was informed by the Knowledgeable, the Ever-aware."*
If the two of you repent to God, then your hearts have listened. But if you band together against him, then God is his master. Gabriel, the righteous of those who acknowledge, and the angels are his supporters.*
It may be that he would divorce you, then his Lord will substitute other wives in your place who are better than you; peacefully surrendering, acknowledging, devout, repentant, serving, active in their societies, responsive, and foremost ones.*
O you who acknowledge, protect yourselves and your families from a fire whose fuel is people and rocks. Guarding it are stern and powerful angels who do not disobey God in what He commanded them; and they carry out what they are commanded to.
O you who have rejected, do not apologize today. You are being requited only for what you did.
O you who acknowledge, you shall repent to God a sincere repentance. It may be that your Lord will remit your sins and admit you into paradises with rivers flowing beneath. On that day, God will not disappoint the prophet and those who acknowledged with him. Their light will radiate around them and to their right. They will say, "Our Lord, keep perfect our light for us, and forgive us; You are able to do all things."
O prophet, strive against the ingrates and the hypocrites and be stern with them. Their abode is hell, and a miserable destiny.
God cites as examples of those who have rejected, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were married to two of Our righteous servants, but they betrayed them and, consequently, they could not help them at all against God. It was said, "Enter the fire, both of you, with those who will enter it."*
God cites as an example of those who acknowledged, the wife of Pharaoh. She said, "My Lord, build a home for me near You in Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his works; and save me from the transgressing people."
Also Mary, the daughter of Imran, who maintained her chastity. So We blew into her from Our Spirit, and she acknowledged the words of her Lord and His books; and she was of those who were obedient.
Most exalted is the One in whose hands is all sovereignty, and He is capable of all things.
The One who created death and life, that He may test you, which of you will do better works? He is the Noble, the Forgiving.
He created seven heavens in harmony. You do not see any disorder in the creation by the Gracious. Keep looking; do you see any flaw?
Then look again twice; your eyes will come back humiliated and tired.
We have adorned the lower heaven with lamps, and We made it with projectiles against the devils; and We prepared for them the retribution of the blazing fire.
For those who rejected their Lord will be the retribution of hell. What a miserable destiny.
When they are thrown therein, they hear its furor as it boils.*
It almost explodes from rage. Whenever a group is thrown therein, its keepers would ask them: "Did you not receive a warner?"
They said, "Yes indeed; a warner did come to us, but we rejected and said, God did not reveal anything, you are being led astray."
They said, "If we had listened or understood, we would not be among the dwellers of the blazing fire!"
Thus, they confessed their sins. So away with the dwellers of the blazing fire.
As for those who reverence their Lord unseen, they have attained forgiveness and a great reward.
Whether you keep your utterances secret, or declare them, He is fully aware of what is inside the chests.
Should He not know what He created? He is the Sublime, the Ever-aware.*
He is the One who made the earth subservient to you. So roam its paths, and eat from His provisions; and to Him is the final summoning.
Are you secure that the One in heaven will not cause the earth to rupture, thus causing it to shake?
Or are you secure that the One in heaven will not send upon you a violent storm? Then you will know the value of the warning.
Those before them have rejected; so how terrible was My requital!
Have they not looked to the birds lined up together above them, and they launch? The Gracious is the One who holds them in the air. He is Seer of all things.
Where is this army of yours to grant you victory without the Gracious? Indeed, those who do not appreciate are deceived.
Where is this who can give you provisions if He holds back His provisions? Indeed, they have plunged deep into transgression and aversion.
Is one who walks with his face groveling better guided, or one who walks straight on the right path?
Say, "He is the One who initiated you, and made for you the hearing, the eyes, and the hearts. Little do you give thanks."
Say, "He is the One who placed you on earth, and to Him you will be gathered."
They say, "When will this promise come to pass, if you are being truthful?"
Say, "The knowledge is only with God, and I am but a clear warner."
So when they see it near, the faces of those who rejected will turn miserable, and it will be proclaimed: "This is what you had called for!"
Say, "Do you see? If God annihilates me and those with me, or He bestows mercy upon us, who is there to protect those who do not appreciate from a painful retribution?"
Say, "He is the Gracious; we acknowledge Him, and we put our trust in Him. You will come to find out who is clearly astray."
Say, "What if your water becomes deep underground, who then can provide you with pure water?"
N50, the pen, and what they write.*
You are not, by the blessing of your Lord, crazy.
You will have a reward that is well deserved.
You are on a high moral standard.
So you will see, and they will see.
Which of you are tormented.
Your Lord is fully aware of those who strayed off His path, and He is fully aware of those who are guided.
So do not obey those who deny.
They wish that you compromise, so they too can compromise.
Do not obey every lowly swearer.
A slanderer, a backbiter.
Forbidder of charity, a transgressor, a sinner.
Ignoble, and additionally, mischievous.
Because he possessed money and children.
When Our signs are recited to him, he says: "Tales from the past!"
We will mark him on the path.
We have tested them like We tested those who owned the farms, when they swore that they will harvest it in the morning.
They were without doubt.
So a passing sent from your Lord came to it while they all were asleep.
Thus, it became barren.
They called on one another when they awoke.
"Let us go this morning to harvest the crop."
So they went, while conversing.
"Let not a poor person come to your presence today."
They went, ready to harvest.
But when they saw it, they said, "We have gone astray!"
"Now, we have nothing!"
The best among them said, "If only you had glorified!"
They said, "Glory be to our Lord. We have transgressed."
Then they started to blame each other.
They said, "Woe to us. We sinned."
"Perhaps our Lord will grant us better than it. We repent to our Lord."
Such was the punishment. But the retribution of the Hereafter is far worse, if they only knew.
The righteous have deserved, at their Lord, paradises of bliss.
Should We treat the ones who peacefully surrendered the same as those who are criminals?
What is wrong with you, how do you judge?
Or do you have another book which you study?
In it, you can find what you wish?
Or do you have an oath from Us, extending until the day of resurrection, that you can judge as you please?
Ask them: "Who of them will make such a claim?"
Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners, if they are truthful.*
The day will come when they will be exposed, and they will be required to prostrate, but they will be unable to.*
With their eyes subdued, humiliation will cover them. They were invited to prostrate when they were whole and able.
Therefore, let Me deal with those who reject this hadith; We will entice them from where they do not perceive.
I will lead them on; for My scheming is formidable.
Or did you ask them for a wage, so they are burdened by the fine?
Or do they know the future? So they have it recorded?
You shall be patient for the judgment of your Lord. Do not be like the companion of the fish who called out while he was in sorrow.*
Had it not been for his Lord's grace, he would be ejected to the shore, in disgrace.
But his Lord blessed him, and made him righteous.
Those who have rejected almost attack you with their eyes when they hear the reminder, and they say, "He is crazy!"
It is but a reminder for the worlds.
Reality!
What is the reality?
Do you know what the reality is?
Thamud and Aad rejected the Shocker.
As for Thamud, they were annihilated by the devastation.
As for Aad, they were annihilated by a furious violent wind.
He unleashed it upon them for seven nights and eight days, in succession. You could see the people destroyed in it, as if they were decayed palm trunks.*
Do you see any legacy for them?
And Pharaoh, and those before him, and the sinners, came with wickedness.
They disobeyed the messenger of their Lord. So He took them with a devastating requital.
When the water flooded, We carried you on the vessel.
That We would make it as a reminder for you, and so that any listening ear may understand.
When the horn is blown once.
The earth and the mountains will be removed from their place and crushed with a single crush.
On that day the unavoidable event will come to pass.
The heavens will be torn, and on that day it will be flimsy.
The angels will be on its borders, and the throne of your Lord will be carried above them by eight.*
On that day, you will be exposed, nothing from you can be hidden.
As for the one who is given his record in his right, he will say, "Here, come and read my record!"
"I knew that I was going to be held accountable."
So he shall be in a life, well-pleasing.
In a lofty Paradise.
Its fruits are within reach.
"Eat and drink merrily in return for your works in days past."
As for he who is given his record in his left, he will say, "Oh, I wish I never received my record,"
"That I never knew my account,"
"I wish the end had been final,"
"My money cannot help me,"
"All my power is gone."
Take him and shackle him.
Then to hell cast him.
Then, in a chain that is the length of seventy hands, tie him up.
For he did not acknowledge God, the Great.
Nor did he advocate the feeding of the poor.
Consequently, he has no friend here today.
Nor any food, except for pollutants.
Food for the sinners.
I swear by what you see.*
What you do not see.
This is the utterance of an honorable messenger.
It is not the utterance of a poet; rarely do you acknowledge.
Nor the utterance of a soothsayer; rarely do you take heed.
A revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
Had he attributed anything falsely to Us.
We would have seized him by the right.
Then, We would have severed his life-line.
None of you would be able to prevent it.
This is a reminder for the righteous.
We know that some of you are deniers.
That it is a distress for the ingrates.
It is the absolute truth.
Therefore, you shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great.*
Someone asked about the inevitable retribution.
For the ingrates, there is nothing that will stop it.
From God, Possessor of the ascending portals.
The angels and the Spirit ascend to Him in a day which is equivalent to fifty thousand years.*
So be patient with a good patience.
They see it as far away.
We see it as near.
On the day the sky is like molten copper.
The mountains are like wool.
No friend will ask about his friend.
When they see it, the criminal will wish he can ransom his children against the retribution.
As well as his mate and his brother.
As well as his whole clan that protected him.
All who are on earth, so that he can be saved!
No, it is a flame.
Eager to roast.
It calls on those who turned away.
Who hoarded and counted.
Indeed, human being is created anxious.
When adversity touches him he is miserable.
When good touches him he is stingy.
Except for those who are supportive.
Who are always maintaining their support/contact prayers.
Those who set aside part of their wealth.
For the seeker and the deprived.
Those who acknowledge the day of Judgment.
Those who are fearful of their Lord's retribution.
The retribution of their Lord is not to be taken for granted.
Those who conceal their private parts.
Except around their spouses or those committed to by oath, there is no blame.*
Then, whoever seeks anything beyond this, they are the transgressors.
Those who are trustworthy and keep their pledges.
Those who uphold their testimonies.
Those who are dedicated to their support/contact prayer.
They will be honored in paradises.
So what is wrong with the ingrates staring at you?
From the right and the left, in crowds?
Does every one of them hope to enter a paradise of bliss?
No, We have created them from what they know.
So I swear by the Lord of the east and the west that We are able.
To replace them with better people, We can never be defeated.
So let them talk in vain and play, until they meet their day which they are promised.
When they will come out of the graves in a rush, as if they are racing towards a goal.
Their eyes are cast down, with shame covering them. This is the day which they were promised.
We have sent Noah to his people: "Warn your people before a painful retribution comes to them."
He said, "My people, I am to you a clear warner."
"That you shall serve God and be aware of Him and obey."
"He shall forgive your sins and delay you to a predetermined time. When God's time comes, then it cannot be delayed, if you know."
He said, "My Lord, I have called on my people night and day."
"But my calling only drove them away!"
"Every time I called on them so that You may forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears and they covered their heads with their outer garments and they insisted, and they became greatly arrogant."
"Then I called to them openly."
"Then I announced to them, and I spoke to them in secret."
"I said, Seek forgiveness from your Lord, for He was forgiving."
"He sends the clouds upon you constantly."*
"He provides you with money and children, and He makes for you gardens, and He makes for you rivers."
"Why do you not seek God humbly."
"While He created you in stages?"*
"Did you not see how God created seven heavens in harmony?"
"He made the moon to illuminate in them, and He made the sun to be a lit flame?"
"God made you grow from the earth as plants."
"Then He returns you to it, and He brings you out totally?"
"God made the land for you as a plain."
"So that you may seek in it ways and paths?"
Noah said, "My Lord, they have disobeyed me and have followed one whose money and children only increased him in loss."
They plotted a great plotting.
They said, "Do not abandon your gods. Do not abandon Destroyer, neither Night Group, Helper, Deterrer, nor Eagle."
They have misguided many, but We only increase the wicked in misguidance.
Because of their sins they were drowned, then they were admitted to the fire, and they could not find beside God any victor.
Noah said, "My Lord, do not leave on the earth any of the ingrates at all."
"If you are to leave them, then they will misguide Your servants and they will only give birth to a wicked ingrate."
"My Lord, forgive me and my parents and whoever enters my home as an acknowledger, and the acknowledging men and the acknowledging women; and do not increase the wicked except in destruction."
Say, "It has been inspired to me that a group of Jinn were listening." They said, "We have heard an interesting recitation/quran!"*
"It guides to what is correct, so we acknowledged it, and we will not set up anyone with our Lord."
"Exalted is the majesty of our Lord, He has not taken a wife nor a son."
"It was the foolish one amongst us who used to say lies about God."
"We had thought that neither people nor the Jinn would ever utter a lie against God."
"There were men from among people who used to seek help from the men among the Jinn, but they only helped increase them in sin."
"They thought as you thought, that God would not send anyone."
"We touched the heavens, but found it full of powerful guards and projectiles."
"We used to sit in it in places of listening, but anyone who sits now finds a projectile seeking him."
"We do not know, is it bad that is intended for those on earth, or does their Lord want them to be guided?"
"Among us are those who are good doers, and some of us are opposite to that, we are in many paths."
"We acknowledge that we cannot escape God on earth, nor can we escape Him if we run."
"When we heard the guidance, we acknowledged it. So whoever acknowledges his Lord, then he will not fear a decrease in reward, nor a burdensome punishment."
"Among us are those who peacefully surrendered, and among us are the compromisers. As for those who have peacefully surrendered, they have sought what is correct."
As for the compromisers, they are firewood for hell.
Had they walked on the right path, We would have provided them with abundant water.
To test them with it. Whosoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will enter him a severe retribution.*
The temples are for God, so do not call on anyone with God.
When God's servant stood up to call on Him, they nearly banded to oppose him.*
Say, "I only call on my Lord, and I do not associate anyone with Him."
Say, "I have no power to cause you harm nor to show you what is right."
Say, "No one can protect me from God, and I will not find any refuge except with Him."
It is but an announcement from God, and His messages. Whosoever disobeys God and His messenger, then he will have the fire of hell to dwell eternally therein.
Until they see what they are promised, then they will know who has the weakest ally and is least in number.
Say, "I do not know if what you are promised is near, or if my Lord will make it distant."
The knower of the unseen, He does not reveal His knowledge to anyone.
Except to whom He has accepted as a messenger; then he leads way in its present and future as a secret observer.
So that He knows that they have delivered the messages of their Lord, and He surrounds all that is with them, and He has counted everything in numbers.*
O you burdened with heavy responsibility,
Stand the night except for a little.
Half of it, or a little less than that.
Or a little more, and enunciate the Quran thoughtfully and distinctly.
We will place upon you a saying which is heavy.
The night-time production is more efficient and better for study.
For you have many duties during the day.
Remember the name of your Lord, and devote to Him completely.
The Lord of the east and the west, there is no god but He; so take Him as a protector.
Be patient over what they say, and depart from them in a good manner.
Leave Me to deal with the deniers who have been given the good things, and give them time for a while.
We have with Us chains and a raging fire.
Food that chokes, and a painful retribution.
The day the earth and the mountains shake, and the mountains become a crumbling pile.
We have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, as We have sent to Pharaoh a messenger.
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We took him in a severe manner.
So how can you be righteous if you have rejected, on a day when the children become gray-haired?
The heavens will shatter with it. His promise is always delivered.
This is a reminder, so let he who wishes take a path to his Lord.
Your Lord knows that you rise a little less than two thirds of the night, and half of it, and one third of it, as well as a group of those who are with you. God measures the night and the day. He knows that you will not be able to keep up, so He pardons you. So study what is made easy of the Quran. He knows that there will be sick among you, and others that venture out in the land seeking from God's bounty, and others who are fighting in the cause of God, so study what you can of it. Hold the contact prayer and contribute towards betterment and give God a loan of righteousness. Whatever you put forth yourselves, you will find it with God, for it is better and a greater reward. Seek God's forgiveness, for God is Forgiving, Compassionate.
O you hidden one.*
Stand and warn.
Your Lord glorify.
Your garments purify.*
Abandon all that is vile.
Do not be greedy.
To your Lord be patient.
So when the trumpet is sounded.
That will be a very difficult day.
Upon the ingrates it will not be easy.
So leave Me alone with the one I have created.
I gave him abundant wealth.
Children to bear witness.
I made everything comfortable for him.
Then he wishes that I give more.
No. He was stubborn to Our signs.
I will exhaust him in climbing.
He thought and he analyzed.
So woes to him for how he analyzed.
Then woe to him for how he analyzed.
Then he looked.
Then he frowned and scowled.
Then he turned away in arrogance.
He said, "This is nothing but an impressive magic."
"This is nothing but the words of a human."
I will cast him in the Saqar.
Do you know what Saqar is?
It does not spare nor leave anything.*
Manifest to all the people.*
On it is nineteen.*
We have made the guardians of the fire to be angels; and We did not make their number except as a test for those who have rejected, to convince those who were given the book, to strengthen the acknowledgment of those who have acknowledged, so that those who have been given the book and those who acknowledge do not have doubt, and so that those who have a sickness in their hearts and the ingrates would say, "What did God mean by this example?" Thus God misguides whoever/whomever He wishes, and He guides whoever/whomever He wishes. None knows your Lord's soldiers except Him. It is but a reminder for people.
No, by the moon.*
By the night when it passes.
By the morning when it shines.
It is one of the great ones.
A warning to people.
For any among you who wishes to progress or regress.
Every person is held by what it earned;
Except for the people of the right.
In paradises, they will be asking
About the criminals.
"What has caused you to be in Saqar?"
They said, "We were not of those who offered support (or observed contact prayer)."*
"We did not feed the poor."
"We used to participate with those who spoke falsehood."
"We used to deny the day of Judgment."*
"Until the certainty came to us."
Thus, no intercession of intercessors could help them.
Why did they turn away from this reminder?*
Like fleeing zebras,
Running from the lion?
Alas, every one of them wants to be given separate manuscripts.
No, they do not fear the Hereafter.
No, it is a reminder.
Whosoever wishes will take heed.
None will take heed except if God wills. He is the source of righteousness and the source of forgiveness.
I swear by the day of Judgment.*
I swear by the person which is self-blaming.
Does the human being think that We will not gather his bones?
Indeed, We were able to make his fingertips.*
No, the human being desires to exceed the limits.
He asks: "When is the day of resurrection?"
So, when the sight is dazzled.
The moon is eclipsed.
The sun and moon are joined together.
Man will say on that day: "Where can I escape!"
No. There is no refuge.
To your Lord on that day is the abode.
Man will be told on that day what he has put forward, and what he has done.
Indeed, the human being will testify against himself.
Even though he puts forth his excuses.
Do not move your tongue with it to make haste.*
It is for Us to collect it and relate it.
So when We relate it, you shall follow its revelation.
Then it is for Us to clarify it.
Alas, you all like this world.
Neglecting the Hereafter.
Faces on that day will be shining.
Looking at their Lord.
Faces on that day will be gloomy.
Thinking that a punishment is coming to them.
Alas, when it reaches the throat.
It will be said, "Who can save him?"
He assumes it is the time of passing.
The leg is buckled around the other leg.
To your Lord on that day he will be driven.
For he did not acknowledge nor support.*
But he denied and turned away.
Then he went to his family admiring himself.
Woe to you and woe to you.
Then woe to you and woe to you.
Did the human being think that he will be left neglected?
Was he not a seed from sperm put forth?
Then he was an embryo, so he was created and developed.
Then He made the two pairs, male and female.
Is One as such then not able to resurrect the dead?
Was there not a time in the past when the human being was nothing to even be mentioned?
We have created the human from a seed that is composite, We test him, so We made him hear and see.
We have guided him to the path, either to be thankful or to reject.
We have prepared for the ingrates chains and collars and a blazing fire.
As for the pious, they will drink from a cup which has the scent of musk.
A spring from which the servants of God drink, it gushes forth abundantly.
They fulfill their vows, and they fear a day whose consequences are widespread.
They give food out of love to the poor and the orphan and the captive.
"We only feed you for the sake of God; we do not desire from you any reward or thanks."
"We fear from our Lord a day, which will be horrible and difficult."
So God shielded them from the evil of that day, and He cast towards them a look and a smile.
He rewarded them for their patience with paradise and silk.
They are reclining in it on raised couches, they do not have in it excessive sun nor bitter cold.
The shade is close upon them, and the fruit is hanging low within reach.
They are served upon with bowls of silver and glasses of crystal.
Crystal laced with silver, measured accordingly.*
They are given to drink in it from a cup which has the scent of ginger.
A spring therein which is called 'Salsabeel'.
They are encircled with eternal children. If you see them you will think they are pearls which have been scattered about.
If you look, then you will see a blessing and a great dominion.
They will have garments of fine green silk, necklaces and bracelets from silver, and their Lord will give them a cleansing drink.
"This is the reward for you, and your struggle is appreciated."
We have sent down to you the Quran at once.
So be patient for the judgment of your Lord, and do not obey from them any sinner or ingrate.
Remember the name of your Lord morning and evening.
From the night you shall prostrate to Him and praise Him throughout.
These people like the current life, and they ignore a heavy day.
We have created them, and We have made them resolute. When we wished, We replaced their kind completely.
This is a reminder, so let whoever wills take a path to his Lord.
You cannot will, except if God wills. God is Knowledgeable, Wise.*
He admits whoever/whomever He wills to His mercy. As for the wicked, He has prepared for them a painful retribution.
By those which are sent to benefit.*
By the blows that explode.
By the distributors that dispense.
By the separators that divide.
By the transmitters of the message.
As an excuse or a warning.
What you are being promised will come to pass.
So when the stars are dimmed.
When the sky is opened.
When the mountains are destroyed.
When the messengers are gathered.
For what day has it been delayed?
For the day of Separation.
Do you know what the day of Separation is?
Woes on that day to the deniers!
Did We not destroy the ancient people
Then We made others succeed them?
It is such that We do to the criminals.
Woes on that day to the deniers!
Did We not create you from a simple water/liquid,*
Then We made it in a place of protection,
Until a time that is predetermined?
So We measured, and We are the best to measure.
Woes on that day to the deniers.
Did We not make the earth an abode,
Living and dead.
We made massive stabilizers in it, and We gave you to drink fresh water?
Woes on that day to the deniers!
Depart unto what you have denied.
Depart unto a shadow with three columns.
Neither does it give shade, nor does it avail from the flames.
It throws sparks as huge as logs.
As if they were yellow camels/ropes.
Woes on that day to the deniers!
This is a day when they shall not speak.
Nor will it be permitted for them so they can make excuses.
Woes on that day to the deniers!
This is the day of Separation where We have gathered you with the ancient people.
So if you have a scheme, then make use of it.
Woes on that day to the deniers!
The righteous are among shades and springs.
Fruit from what they desire.
"Eat and drink comfortably for what you used to do."
It is such that We reward the good doers.
Woes on that day to the deniers!
"Eat and enjoy for a little while, for you are criminals."
Woes on that day to the deniers!
When they are told to kneel, they do not kneel.*
Woes on that day to the deniers!
So in what hadith after it will they acknowledge?
What are they inquiring about?
About the grand news.*
The one which they are in disagreement about.
No, they will come to know.
No, then again, they will come to know.
Did We not make the earth a resting ground?
The mountains as pegs?
We created you in pairs?
We made your sleep for resting?
We made the night as a covering?
We made the day to work in?
We constructed above you seven mighty ones?
We made a flaming light?
We sent down abundant water from the rain clouds.
To bring out with it seeds and plants.
Gardens of thick growth?
The day of Separation is an appointed time.
The day when the horn is blown and you come in crowds.
The heaven is opened, so it becomes gates.
The mountains will be moved as if they were a mirage.
For hell is in wait.
For the transgressors it is a dwelling place.
They will abide in it for eons.
They will not taste anything cold in it nor drink.
Except for boiling water and filthy discharge.
An exact recompense.
They did not expect a reckoning/computation.*
They denied Our signs greatly.
Everything We have counted in a record.
So taste it, for no increase will come to you from Us except in retribution.
As for the righteous, they will have success.
Gardens and vineyards.
Impressive peers.
A cup that is full.
They do not hear in it any vile talk or lies.
A reward from your Lord, in recognition for what is done.
The Lord of heavens and earth and what is between them, the Gracious. They do not posses any authority beside Him.
The day when the Spirit and the angels stand in line, none will speak unless the Gracious permits him and he speaks what is true.
That is the day of truth, so let whoever wills seek a way to his Lord.
I have warned you of a retribution which is close, the day when man will look at what he has brought forth and the ingrate will say, "I wish I were dust!"
By those that pull forcibly.*
Those that release vigorously.
Those that float along.
Those that press forward in a race.
So as to carry out a command.
On the day the ground shakes.
It will be followed by the second blow.
Hearts on that day will be terrified.
Their eyes cast down.
They will say, "Shall we be returned to live our lives."
"Even after we were crumbled bones?"
They said, "This is an impossible recurrence."
But all it takes is one blow.
Whereupon they will rise up.
Did the hadith of Moses come to you?
His Lord called him at the holy valley of Tuwa.
"Go to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed."
Tell him: "Would you not be purified?"
"I will guide you to your Lord, that you may turn reverent."
He then showed him the great sign.
But he rejected and rebelled.
Then he turned away in a hurry.
So he gathered and proclaimed.
He said, "I am your lord, the most high."*
So God seized him with retribution in the Hereafter, as well as in the first life.
In that is a lesson for those who are aware.
Are you a more powerful creation than the sky which He built?
He raised its height, and perfected it.
He covered its night and brought out its morning.
The land after that, He made it like an egg.*
He brought forth from it its water and pasture.
The mountains He fixed firmly.
All this to be a provision for you and your livestock.
Then, when the great blow comes.
The day when the human remembers all that he strove for.
Hell will be apparent to all who can see.
As for the one who transgressed.
He was preoccupied with the worldly life.
Then hell will be the abode.
As for the one who reverenced the majesty of his Lord, and restrained himself from desire.
The Paradise will be the abode.
They ask you about the moment: "When is its appointed time?"
You have no knowledge if it.
To your Lord is its term.
You are simply to warn those who fear it.
For the day they see it, it will be as if they had remained an evening or half a day.
He frowned and turned away.
When the blind one came to him.
What makes you know, perhaps he is seeking to purify?
Or to remember, so the remembrance will benefit him?
As for the one who was conceited;
To him you attended.
Why does it concern you that he does not want to purify?
As for the one who came to you seeking.
While he was fearful.
You were too preoccupied for him.
No, this is but a reminder.
For whoever wills to remember.
In records which are honorable.
Exalted and pure.
By the hands of scribes.
Honorable and righteous.
Woe to human being; how unappreciative!
From what did He create him?
From a seed He created him and designed him.
Then the path He made easy for him.
Then He made him die and buried him.
Then if He wishes He resurrects him.
Alas, he did not fulfill what He commanded him.
Let the human being look to his provisions.
We have poured the water abundantly.
Then We cracked the land with cracks.
We made grow in it seeds.
Grapes and pasture.
Olives and palm trees.
Gardens in variety.
Fruits and vegetables.
An enjoyment for you and your livestock.
So when the screaming shout comes.
The day when a person will run from his brother.
His mother and father.
His mate and children.
For every person on that day is a matter that concerns him.
On that day are faces which are openly displayed.
Laughing and seeking good news.
Faces on that day with dust on them.
Being burdened by remorse.
Those are the ingrates, the wicked.
When the sun is rolled.
When the stars fade away.
When the mountains are moved.
When the reproduction is ended.
When the beasts are gathered.
When the seas are made to boil.
When the persons are paired.*
When the girl killed in infancy is asked,
"For what crime was she killed?"
When the records are displayed.
When the sky is removed.
When hell is ignited.
When Paradise is made near.
Every person will know what it had done!
So, I swear by the collapsing/elusive stars.*
That run and hide.
The night when it passes.
The morning when it breathes.
It is the saying of an honorable messenger.
With power and influence from the One of the throne.
Obeyed, and trustworthy.
Your friend is not crazy.
He saw him by the clear horizon.*
He has no knowledge of the future.
It is not the saying of an outcast devil.
So where will you go?
It is but a reminder for the worlds.
For whomever of you wishes to be straight.
You cannot will anything except if God also wills, the Lord of the worlds.*
When the sky is cracked.
When the planets are scattered.
When the seas burst.
When the graves are laid open.
Then the person will know what it has brought forth and what it has left behind.
O mankind, what has turned you arrogant against your Lord, the Most Generous?
The One who created you, then designed you, then proportioned you?*
In any which form He chose, He constructed you.
No, you are but deniers of the system.
Over you are those who watch.
Honorable scribes.
They know what you do.
The pious are in Paradise.
The wicked are in hell.
They will enter it on the day of Deen.
They will not be absent from it.
Do you know what the day of Deen is?
Then again, do you know what the day of Deen is?
The day when no person possesses anything for any other person, and the decision on that day is to God.*
Woe to those who cheat.*
Those who when they are receiving any measure from the people, they take it in full.
When they are the ones giving measure or weight, they give less than due.
Do these not assume that they will be resurrected?
To a great day?
The day people will stand before the Lord of the worlds.
No, the record of the wicked is in Sijjeen.
Do you know what Sijjeen is?
A numbered record.*
Woes on that day to the deniers.
Those who denied the day of recompense.*
None will deny it except every transgressor who knows no bounds.
When Our signs are recited to him, he says: "Tales of the ancients!"
No, a covering has been placed on their hearts for what they have earned.
No, they will be blocked from their Lord on that day.
Then they will be entered into the hell.
Then it will be said, "This is what you used to deny!"
No, the record of the pious is in Elliyeen.
Do you know what Elliyeen is?
A numbered record.
To be witnessed by those brought near.
The pious are in Paradise.
Upon luxurious furnishings, observing.
You know in their faces the look of Paradise.
They are given drink from a pure sealed vial.
Its seal will be of musk, so in that let those who are in competition compete.
Its taste will be special.
A spring from which those who are brought near will drink.
Those who were criminals used to laugh at those who had acknowledged.
When they passed by them they used to wink to each other.
When they returned to their people, they would return jesting.
If they see them they say, "These are indeed misguided!"
But they were not sent over them as caretakers.
Today, those who had acknowledged are laughing at the ingrates!
Upon the luxurious furnishings they are observing.
Have the ingrates not been reprised for what they used to do?
When the sky is ruptured.
Attends to its Lord, and is ready.
When the earth is stretched.
It spits out what is in it and becomes empty.
It attends to its Lord, and is ready.
O mankind, you will be returning to your Lord with your actions and meeting Him.
So whoever is given his record in his right.
He will then receive an easy reckoning.
He will return to his family in joy!
As for he who is given his record behind his back.
He will invoke his destruction.
He will enter a blazing fire.
He used to be joyful amongst his people!
He thought he would not be returned.
No, He is ever seeing of him.
So, I swear by the redness of dusk.
The night and what it is driven on.
The moon when it is full.
You will ride a stage/layer upon a stage/layer.
So what is the matter with them that they do not acknowledge?
When the Quran is being related to them, they do not prostrate.
No, those who have rejected are in denial.
God is more aware of what they gather.
So inform them of a painful retribution.
Except for those who acknowledge and do good works, they will have a reward that will not end.
By the universe laden with galaxies.*
The appointed day.
A witness and a witnessed.
Woes to people of the canyon.
The fire supplied with fuel.
Then they sat around it.
They were witness to what they did to those who acknowledge.
They hated them because they acknowledged God, the Noble, the Praiseworthy!
The One to whom belongs the kingship of heavens and earth, and God is witness over everything.
Those who have put the acknowledging men and women under ordeal, and then did not repent, they will have the retribution of hell, and they will have the retribution of burning.
Those who acknowledge and do good works, they will have gardens with rivers flowing beneath. Such is the great reward.
The punishment of your Lord is severe.
It is He who initiates and then returns.
He is the Forgiver, the Most Kind.
Possessor of the throne, the Glorious.
Doer of what He wills.
Has news come to you of the soldiers?
Pharaoh and Thamud?
No, those who rejected are in denial.
God, after them, is Encompassing.
No, it is a glorious Quran.
In a tablet, preserved.*
The sky and the herald.*
Do you know what the herald is?
The piercing star.
Every person has a recorder over it.
So let the human being see from what he was created.*
He was created from water that spurts forth.
It comes out from between the spine and the testicles.
For He is able to bring him back.
The day when all is revealed.
Then he will not have any power or victor.
The sky which gives rain.
The land with small cracks.
This is the word that separates matters.
It is not a thing for amusement.
They are plotting a scheme.
And I plot a scheme.
So respite the ingrates, respite them for a while.
Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High.
The One who created and designed.
The One who measured and then guided.
The One who brought out the pasture.
So He made it dry up into hay.
We will make you study, so do not forget.
Except for what God wills, He knows what is declared and what is hidden.
We will make easy for you the way.
So remind, perhaps the reminder will help.
He who is reverent will remember.
He who is wicked will avoid it.
He will enter the great fire.
Then he will neither die in it nor live.*
Whosoever develops will succeed.
Remembers the name of his Lord, and reaches out.
No, you desire the worldly life.
But the Hereafter is better and more lasting.
This has been revealed in the previous scripts.
The scripts of Abraham and Moses.
Has the news come to you of the Overwhelming?
Faces on that day will be desolate.
Laboring and weary.
They will enter a blazing fire.
Be given to drink from a boiling spring.
They will have no food except from a thorny plant.
It does not nourish nor avail against hunger.
Faces on that day are joyful.
For their pursuit they are content.
In a high paradise.
You will not hear in it any nonsense.
In it is a running spring.
In it are raised beds.
Cups that are set.
Cushions arranged in rows.
Rich carpets spread out.
Will they not look at the camels/clouds, how are they created?
To the sky, how is it raised?
To the mountains, how was it set?
To the land, how was it flattened?
So remind, for you are but a reminder.
You have no power over them.
Except for he who turns away and rejects.
Then God will punish him with the great retribution.
Indeed, to Us is their return.
Then to Us is their judgment.
By the dawn.
The ten nights.
The even and the odd.
The night when it passes.
In this is an oath for the one with intelligence.
Did you not see what your Lord did to Aad?
Iram, with the great columns?*
The one which was like no other in the land?
Thamud who carved the rocks in the valley?
And Pharaoh with the pyramids?
They all transgressed in the land.
Made much corruption therein.
So your Lord poured upon them a measure of retribution.*
Your Lord is ever watchful.
As for man, if his Lord tests him and grants him much, then he says: "My Lord has blessed me!"
If his Lord tests him and gives him little wealth, then he says: "My Lord has humiliated me!"
No, you are not generous to the orphan.
You do not look to feeding the poor.
You consume others inheritance, all with greed.
You love money, a love that is excessive.
No, when the earth is pounded into rubble.
Your Lord comes with the angels row after row.
Hell on that day is brought. On that day the human being will remember, but how will the remembrance now help him?
He says: "I wish I had worked towards my life!"
On that day, no other will bear his punishment.
Nor will anyone be able to free his bonds.
"As for you, O the content person."
"Return to your Lord pleasing and pleased."
"Enter in amongst My servants."
"Enter My Paradise."
I swear by this land.*
While you are a legal resident at this land.
A father and what he begets.
We have created the human being to struggle.
Does he think that no one is able to best him?
He says: "I spent so much money!"
Does he think that no one saw him?
Did We not make for him two eyes?
A tongue and two lips?
We guided him to both paths?
He should choose the better path.
Do you know which the better path is?
The freeing of slaves.*
Or the feeding on a day of great hardship.
An orphan of relation.
Or a poor person in need.
Then he has become one of those who have acknowledged, and exhort one another to patience, and exhort one another to kindness.
Those are the people of happiness.
As for those who rejected Our signs, they are the people of misery.
Upon them is a fire closed over.
By the Sun and its brightness.*
The Moon that comes after it.
The day which reveals.
The night which covers.
The sky and what He built.
The earth and what He sustains.
A person and what He made.
So He gave it its evil and good.
Successful is the one who betters it.
Failing is the one who hides it.
Thamud denied their transgression.
They followed the worst amongst them.
God's messenger said to them: "This is God's camel, let her drink."
They rejected him, and they killed her. So their Lord repaid them for their sin and leveled it.*
Yet, those who came after remain heedless.
By the night when it covers.*
The day when it appears.
He created the male and female.
Your works are various.
As for he who gives and is righteous.
Trusts in goodness.
We will make the easy path for him.
As for he who is stingy and holds back.
Denies goodness.
We will make the difficult path for him.
His wealth will not avail him when he demises.
It is upon Us to guide.
To Us is the end and the beginning.
I have warned you of a fire that blazes.
None shall have it but the wicked.
The one who denies and turns away.
As for the righteous, he will be spared it.
The one who gives his money to develop with.
Seeking nothing in return.
Except the face of His Lord, the Most High.
He will be satisfied.
By the late morning.
The night when it falls.
Your Lord has not left you, nor did He forget.
The Hereafter is better for you than the first.
Your Lord will give you and you will be pleased.
Did he not find you an orphan and He sheltered you?
He found you lost, and He guided you?*
He found you in need, so He gave you riches?
As for the orphan, you shall not make him sad.
As for the beggar, you shall not reprimand.
You shall proclaim the blessings from your Lord.
Did We not relieve your chest,*
Take from you your load,
Which had put strain on your back?
We have raised your remembrance,
So with hardship comes ease.
With hardship comes ease.
So when you are done, then stand.
To your Lord you shall seek.
By the fig and the olive.*
The mount of ages.
This secure land.
We have created people in the best form.
Then We returned him to the lowest of the low.
Except those who have acknowledged and carry out reforms; they will have a reward of thanks.
So what would make you deny the system after that?
Is God not the wisest of the wise?
Read in the name of your Lord who has created.*
He created the human being from an embryo.*
Read, and your Lord is the Generous One.
The One who taught by the pen.
He taught the human being what he did not know.
Alas, the human being is bound to transgress.
When he achieves, he no longer has need!
To your Lord is the return.
Have you seen the one who deters,
A servant from being supportive?
Have you seen if he was being guided,
Or he ordered righteousness?
Have you seen if he lied and turned away?
Did he not know that God can see?
Alas, if he does not cease, we will strike the frontal lobe.
A frontal lobe which lies and errs.
So let him call on his supporter.
We will call on the guardians.
So do not obey him, prostrate and come near.
We have sent it down in the Night of Decree.*
Do you know what the Night of Decree is?
The Night of Decree is better than one thousand months.
The angels and the Spirit come down in it by their Lord's leave to carry out every matter.
It is peaceful until the coming of dawn.
Those who rejected amongst the people of the book and those who set up partners would not leave until proof came to them.
A messenger from God reciting purified scripts.
In them are valuable books.
Those who had previously received the book did not divide except after the proof came to them.
They were not commanded except to serve God and be loyal to His system, monotheism, and hold the contact prayer and contribute towards betterment. Such is the valuable system.*
Those who rejected from the people of the book and those who set up partners are in the fires of hell abiding therein, those are the worst of creation.
As for those who acknowledge and do good works, they are the best of creation.
Their reward with their Lord is the gardens of Eden with rivers flowing beneath them; they abide eternally therein. God is satisfied with them, and they are satisfied with Him. That is for whoever feared His Lord.
When the earth rumbles and shakes.
The earth brings out its mass.
The human being will say, "What is wrong with her?"
On that day it will inform its news.
That your Lord had inspired her to do so.
On that day, the people will be brought out in throngs to be shown their works.
So whoever does an atoms weight of good will see it.
Whoever does an atoms weight of evil will see it.
By the fast gallopers.*
Striking sparks.
Charging in the morning.
Forming clouds of dust.
Penetrating into the midst together.
Surely, the human being is ungrateful to his Lord.
He will indeed bear witness to this.
He loves wealth tenaciously.
Does he not realize that when what is in the graves are scattered.
What is in the chests is gathered.
That their Lord has been fully cognizant of them?
The Shocker.
What is the Shocker?
How would you know what the Shocker is?
The day when people come out like swarms of butterflies.
The mountains will be like fluffed up wool.
As for him whose weights are heavy.
He will be in a happy life.
As for him whose weights are light.
His destiny is the lowest.
How would you know what it is?
A blazing fire.
Hoarding has distracted you.*
Until you visit the graves.
No, you will find out.
Then again, you will find out.
No, if only you knew with certainty.
You would then see the hell.
Then you would see it with the eye of certainty.
Then you will be questioned, on that day, about the blessings.
By time,
The human is indeed in loss.
Except those who acknowledge, carry out the reforms, exhort one another with the truth and exhort one another with perseverance.
Woe unto every backbiter, slanderer.*
Who gathered his wealth and counted it.
He thinks that his wealth will make him immortal.
Never! He will be thrown into the Hutama.
Do you know what the Hutama is?
God's kindled fire.
Which reaches the inside of the hearts.
It will confine them therein.
In extended columns.
Have you not noticed what your Lord did to the people of the elephant?
Did He not cause their schemes to go astray?
He sent upon them swarms of flying creatures.
Striking them with fiery projectiles.
Until He turned them like devoured hay.
For the unity and security of Quraysh.
Their unity and security during their journey of the winter and summer.
So let them serve the Lord of this sanctuary.
The One who fed them from hunger, and protected them from fear.
Do you notice who rejects the system?
It is the one who mistreats the orphan.
Does not encourage the feeding of the poor.
So woe to those who offer support (or observe contact-prayer).*
Who are totally heedless of their support (or of observing their contact-prayer).
They only want to be seen,
They refuse aid.
We have given you plenty.
Therefore, you shall reach out to your Lord, and devote yourself.
Indeed your rival will be the loser.
Say, "O ingrates,"
"I do not serve what you serve,"
"Nor do you serve what I serve,"
"Nor will I serve what you serve,"
"Nor will you serve what I serve,"
"To you is your system, and to me is mine."
When God's victory and conquest comes.*
You will see people entering into God's system in groups.
You shall glorify your Lord's grace, and seek His forgiveness. He is the Redeemer.
Condemned is the power of the flaming provocateur; condemned indeed.*
His money will not avail him, nor what he has earned.
To a flaming fire he will be cast.
His wife carrying the logs.
With a twisted rope on her neck.
Say, "He is God, the One,"*
"God, the Absolute/First-cause,"
"Never did He beget, nor was He begotten,"
"None is equal to Him."
Say, "I seek refuge in the Lord of the dawn,"
"From the evil of what He has created,"
"From the evil of darkness as it falls,"
"From the evil of those who whisper into the contracts and affairs,"
"From the evil of the envious when they envy."
Say, "I seek refuge in the Lord of the people,"
"The King of the people,"
"The god of people,"
"From the evil of the sneaky whisperer,"*
"Who whispers into the chests of the people,"
"From among the Jinn and people."
